Title: Alcohol and Sex
Category: Feminism
Date: 2015/05/14

I’ll start this post with some concessions. Yes, there are amounts of alcohol that can be consumed without completely compromising consent. Yes, alcohol is not necessarily an evil as it relates to sex and on occasion it can enhance the experience. All these are potentially true. The problem that alcohol does bring to sex is when it is excessively consumed disabling one from consenting, or when its consumption leads to one’s judgement and ability to articulate desires, both positive and negative, being depleted if not entirely dismantled. 

The problem is exacerbated by our social understanding of the relationship between alcohol in sex. For some, alcohol provides a near necessary lubricant for one to open up and be more willing to engage in the sexual activity they desire sober, but are too nervous to pursue. But, is it not indicative of a greater problem in our society that people develop such an anxiety with regard to sex that they need to be in an altered state to engage in desired behaviors? I don’t mean to confuse people who use alcohol to loosen up with people who douse themselves in alcohol and undertake activities they will later regret. The two situations are obviously different. One who uses alcohol to purposefully undermine their agency is engaging in a toxic behavior that is a lot more likely to compromise their safety and their mental, physical, and emotional health.

Our society’s misguided relationship between alcohol and sex also manifests in other ways. Perhaps the worst thing I hear on occasion is some articulation of the idea that “inebriated, ambiguous-consent sex is okay if we’re equally drunk.” This notion is obviously wrong. 

First, consider what would make the situation wrong if the parties were not equally drunk. It seems there is an implication that the less drunk party would be engaging in some sort of predatory behavior. The behavior would be predatory because the more inebriated party would be unable to consent, or at least depleted in the capacity, and thus the less drunk party would be taking advantage of that person. This is by definition sexual assault.

Now consider what possible remedy could be offered by introducing more alcohol into the situation. Is the second party escalating to the more drunk individual’s level of intoxication going to restore the more drunk individual’s ability to consent? Probably not. Actually, all that seems to be accomplished is the less drunk individual in the process of drinking to match the more drunk individuals drunkenness will lose their ability to consent. Now there are two vulnerable people engaging in behavior that both may enjoy or may regret. While, the possibility for a great experience is not zero, the potential for a horrible one is more than enough to condemn the idea. Ambiguous-consent sex, is not okay.

Then why do we tolerate it. More importantly, why have we sculpted a culture around it. Bar scenes are filled with people, plowing themselves with alcohol, diminishing their judgement and their agencies, engaging in sex with strangers. And we call this a sex life. Even if our society has dulled itself over time to the fact that these occurrences are approximations of sexual assault even if neither party feels taken advantage of. Now surely two individuals agreeing to meet up and share drinks and afterward sex are not subverting one another’s consent, especially if the two plan to have sex prior to alcohol’s introduction (provided of course that neither party drinks so heavily that they are no longer aware of their actions or able to make sound judgements.) But most of the inebriated sexual conduct does not fit this mold. 

Any substantive effort to reduce rape will have to address this problem. Studies are all over the place on the facts, but we know no less than 50% of men who commit sexual assaults have been drinking, and this figure could be as high as 75%. The same goes for victims of sexual assault who are inebriated upwards of 50% of the time. The facts suggest, then, that if someone is sexually assaulted, most of the time alcohol is involved. Why then do we allow this terrible phenomenon to exist.

There are at least two identifiable reasons, but potentially others of course. First, we like sex. Few would deny that alcohol increases one chances of having sex, and surely many of us have anecdotes about times we had awesome drunk sex. Unfortunately, there are far too many anecdotes about times people, usually women, were taken advantage of while inebriated states, and others where people, usually men, drunkenly misinterpreted or even ignored clear signs of consent being withheld or even dissent be actively articulated. Yes, at first, severing the tie between sex and alcohol may lead to less sex. But it will certainly lead to less rape and as a society that is a tradeoff we should be willing to make.

Second, we are afraid of sex. Sex is relegated to the internet and to late night cable television. Sex stores are usually in shady parts of town appearing to have sexual desire is dissuaded, especially for women. We slut shame those who have too much sex, and we question the purity of individuals who engage in the act at all. It is no surprise that we are afraid to go out and have sex. Society will condemn. Our fear of sex makes us willing to take on an alcohol-fueled dissociative state  in which we are increasingly vulnerable to become victims and perpetrators. We have to get more comfortable with sex. We have to as a society, directly confront our apprehensions. 

Sex is awesome. Let’s start acting like it.

P.S. I hope this post isn’t understood as claiming alcohol is the only factor leading to rape. As many theorists have argued and statistics and anecdotes show, rape has many dimensions as a social phenomenon, one of which being a show of power, dominance, and rape also stems in many cases from a belief in ownership or entitlement to the other’s body. I do, however, contend that alcohol exacerbates the problem and if we are to put this fire out, we shouldn’t pour alcohol on it.

