Title: Atheists and Social Justice
Category: Religion
Date: 2016/03/03

As some social justice warriors have begun to rely more greatly on subjective accounts of oppression, they have, perhaps unbeknownst to them, invited the criticism of renowned internet atheists. From TJ, “The Amazing Atheist”, to DarkMatter2525 and “The Armoured Skeptic,” other atheist YouTubers, there has been no shortage of videos attacking feminism and social justice warriors in general. While I do not hope to make generalizations about all atheists or all “SJW”s, I do think looking at the conflicts brewing between vocal factions of each group reveals important things about oppression, the limits of objectivity, and the nature of effective advocacy.

While it is easy to categorically dismiss the criticisms leveled by atheist YouTubers, a near homogenous group of young adult to middle-aged white men, understanding the source of their criticism is enlightening. Atheists, at large, attempt to rely on objective metrics. This may sound familiar since many paragraphs in my blog are dedicated to advocating such an approach. Moreover, atheists of the kind I’m discussing in this blog are also very suspicious of selective censorship, as they perceive that as a pernicious weapon of indoctrination, and they are particularly concerned about group polarization, the phenomenon whereby a group of likeminded people develop more extreme, deep convictions as a result of their ideas going unchallenged (Aronson 2010).

In the social justice context, both these phenomena are becoming more prevalent. What started as a call for individuals to be more considerate of how their speech and actions affect others has, for some, quickly grown into a complete intolerance for different opinions. This intolerance has closely begun to mirror the fanaticism that accompanies many religious individuals approach to faith; namely a blind acceptance of the claims emanating from authorities (e.g. religious figures or the Bible) and a visceral distrust of the character of people who hold opposing views (e.g. labeling them sinners).

The similarities do not stop there. Think of religious depictions of the world. In structure, social justice warriorship does share a lot of similarities. For starters both the religious and the “woke” both want us to accept that people are born, or quickly indoctrinated into, a flawed society. They argue that one of the essential features of our flawed society is that the people in it, against their will, are compelled to sin, in the religious narrative, or be racist, sexist, homophobic, ableist, etc, in the social justice narrative. They next argue that the only way to overcome this condition is to acknowledge your deficiency and work against your nature. The religious narrative, however, often includes a caveat about giving oneself over to a higher being or accepting the futility of one’s own humanity or some other, in my opinion, similarly unattractive proposition. I’m not sure sufficient analogs exist in social justice dialogue.

But social justice dialogue does come with some of the same logical peculiarities common to religious thought. Like, for one, how, if we are not free to choose to not be sinners in the way we are not free to choose to be not racists, are we then eligible for contempt? It has always seemed odd to me that in the religious context, there was no real story of culpability. Some argue that the culpability resides with the initial sinner, Eve, and likewise some argue that the first racists doomed us all. But I’ve never found such argumentation compelling. Granted, some individuals enjoy harming others and others purposefully and proudly discriminate against people in many ways and along many lines. But none of that further justifies punishing or giving contempt to people who “sin” unintentionally or despite their best try and people who are racist or sexist in the same way.

It is in recognizing these budding similarities between religion and social justice dialogue of late that youtuber atheists, with the expressed mission to attack religiosity and other rationality-compromising endeavors (e.g. partisanship, junk science, etc.), have turned their critical gaze on social justice warriors. Their criticisms are simple, potent, and misguided.

Essentially, the atheist I’m referring to argue that social justice warriors have turned whiteness and maleness into disqualifying factors that disable people concerned with social justice from participating in the dialogue if their views, skin color, or genitalia does not match the accepted standard for speaking on a particular issue. They believe this has the consequence of silencing allies, if not turning them into enemies, and also increasing hypersensitivity generally. I, you may recall, have made very similar points (*see* “Social Justice Shadowboxing”).

So, you may wonder, how is one to differentiate the social justice narrative from a religious one?

*Drum roll please*

Evidence.

I’ve long argued that we should treat claims of oppression as hypotheses, make predictions using those hypotheses and then measure or collect data on the relevant phenomena to demonstrate the truth of falsity of those hypotheses. We cannot treat testimonies of feeling oppressed as evidence of oppression no more than we can treat testimonies about experiences of the supernatural as evidence of the supernatural. Both, in very serious ways, are subject to the specific perception, sensibilities, and feelings of the testifier, and, as a result will be very unreliable. But, as I often admit, in the social justice context, the ubiquity of race, sex, sexuality, and other such categorical injustices does make oppression hard to incorrectly identify. And that, kind of my point. We don’t need to restrict speech or demand strict acquiescence. The evidence is overwhelming on our side. And thus I think the atheist criticizers are correct when they condemn current popular practice for producing more enemies than allies, as numbers is actually what we need.

But, what the atheist criticizers fail to realize, in their beautiful white maleness, is that one’s claimed identities and the identities people see on to one greatly influence the hypotheses that one can generate. For example, as a man of reasonable strength, I have a very different understanding of force and intimidation than many women might. Most of the people I meet in my day do not possess the physical force to overpower me. If confronted with a situation in which I would need to resist, I am confident my resistance would be substantial if not successful and thus my notion of what it would mean for someone to force me to do something is very different than a typical woman. For many women, many of the people they meet throughout the day do possess enough strength to overpower them. More pertinent to the point I’m attempting to make, many women are not confident that they possess the strength to mount a substantial or successful resistance to the most determined individuals, and their is a further risk of great bodily harm if they attempt to resist. Thus, the idea that they are being forced to do something may inhabit them well before physical force is involved. Add to this the current predatory nature of American sexual practices (been to a bar lately) and you can see why women might overwhelming support stricter rape laws as compared to men. Not because they want super protections, but because they want protections that mirror the dangers they face.

What oftens happens to preachers of objectivity is they forget they don’t have all the information. With respect to social phenomenon, a blindspot can be especially significant. Not recognizing that having a black sounded name will diminishes your job prospects by 50% and being women will likely diminishes your lifetime earning because our society poorly valuates maternity and caretaking services; failing to realize the realities of others lives, will invariably lead one to overlook to possible explanations of how such oppression persists. Potentially, it might even make one hostile to explanations that seem implausible because they will be understood as “asking for too much,” “attacking white men,” etc., etc.. That’s not to say that “SJW”s don’t sometimes ask for too much or attack white men; I’m more suggesting that the atheist criticizers I’m referring to often fail to make space for more information (that they may not have access to) in their objective analyses. 

P.S. This post is not meant to denigrate religion or religious people. But the belief structure is problematic even if the institution can be a source of good (though often isn't, also).
