Title: Athletes Are Overpaid
Category: Race
Date: 2015/09/24

Many people believe athletes make too much money. It is commonly said that it’s a shame how much athletes makes, especially when it is compared to the salaries of civil servants and middle class jobs. Granted, athletes at the highest level do make a lot of money. But, I believe that this grievance that many people share is racially motivated.

Hear me out.

This economic criticism is most commonly directed at basketball players and football players; two sports dense with black participation. It is much less common to hear someone complain of the salaries of hockey players (who are more likely to be white) or baseball players (who are often paid much more than basketball and football players). Moreover, the concern seems to be less over the fiscal irresponsibility that many athletes demonstrate and more about the appropriateness that such large sums of money should go to people of this character. In discussion I’ve overheard and participated in, I’ve heard people describe high-salaried athletes (especially black ones) as drug users, thugs, hoodlums, and other such names that would imply low moral character and a correlative low desert of the funds they are given.

Now, if athletes (understood primarily as basketball and football players) are really undeserving of the money they make, their must be something that disqualifies them from being deserving. So far as I can hypothesize there are three reasons one might argue someone is undeserving of a certain level of compensation: (1) it could be that the service provided is not valuable enough to warrant the compensation; (2) it could be that the person or people in question cannot be credited with a large enough role in providing the service rendered to justify their level of compensation; (3) it could be that independent of the service provided, the person receiving the compensation is not worthy of it because of some feature about the person external to the service rendered.

If one believes athletes are paid too much because of (1), then I wonder why these people are not equally vocal about the compensation of movie stars and tv personalities. The kind of service provided is entertainment. Entertainment takes different forms. I doubt one could sustain a claim to the effect that the skill involved in acting is superior to the skill involved in competing in a sport. I further doubt that the time commitment of an actor is any greater than that of a professional athlete. There is some disgruntled rhetoric surrounding the money made by people on the big and little screen, but the amount of criticism directed at those individuals is negligible when compared to incessant complaints about athlete salary. I contend that this disparity in outrage is due to the fact the cinema and television are both dominated by white people.

If one believes athletes are paid too much because of (2), then I would question where instead the funds should be going. Athletes sacrifice their bodies and time with loved ones (because of travel). Who else can be said to be more deserving of the massive revenues generated by professional sports. The coach? GM? Owner? League directors? All these other entities are exceptionally more likely to be white than a player is. Moreover, it is a ridiculous contention that athletes are not the primary contributors to service that is being paid for. People come to watch the players play, not to watch the coaches coach or the owners own.

But if disproportionate compensation is a concern of yours, surely you might want to take a look at corporate salaries and bonus. CEOs are making, in some cases, multiple magnitudes more money than some of their employees, independent of the fact that the people on the ground actually make the company go. Perhaps instead of focusing on athletes who are getting a very small piece of the pie, why not criticize the real bandits. My guess is because a CEO is overwhelmingly likely to be white (and a man).

If one believes athletes are paid too much because of (3), I’d be interested to know how they arrived at this conclusion. Surely some athletes are rambunctious and routinely find themselves in trouble, but that cannot be said for most athletes. To make such a claim would require a high degree of prejudice and a further unwillingness to relent the evaluation in the face of counter evidence. I’m pretty familiar with a type of prejudice that behaves exactly like that. It’s called racism.

Athletes provide a service that Americans love and are willing to pay large sums of money to consume. They possess rare ability and are thus compensated for it. Also, though the amount of money athletes are paid may be high, it’s not a very large percentage of the revenue taken in by the leagues they play for. The NBA’s most recent collective bargaining agreement, for example, saw a cut in player compensation by multiple percentage points as those profits were redirected to the share ultimately taken by owners. The fact is, athletes are probably underpaid, as the value of their service is extremely high.

P.S. I understand the contention that civil servants such as police and firefighters are paid much less than athletes, and that teachers could use a salary boost as well. But too arbitrarily isolate athletes for criticism, given the racial dynamic of this country, is suspicious to me. This is just a hypothesis. What do you think?
