Title: Black People Have No Choice
Category: Race
Date: 2015/11/12

In “Conservative Inconsistencies Surrounding Race,” I discussed something similar to what will be discussed in this post. But in that post, I focused on instances of contradictions. In this post, I’m hoping to demonstrate a contradictory trajectory black people hoping to effect change are forced to follow. I want to illustrate how frustrating it can be, and why it constitutes an additional injustice on top of the pernicious and destructive effects of racism in all its forms.

For starters, consider much of the rhetoric spouted by many Conservative presidential candidates right now about how they would deal with Vladimir Putin. They say, the reason he doesn’t respect the US and our demands is because Obama is too soft on him. They argue that if we were to increase our military forces in general and increase our military presence in the region, we would quickly see a change in Putin’s actions. He would take our demands seriously. This is just one particular manifestation of a larger traditionally Conservative platform which holds that military might and stature is inseparable from forwarding US interests at home and abroad; interests that include economic concerns but also human rights and international cooperation.

Whether or not a strong military produces those things is not my concern. Instead I wonder how these same individuals can argue that violence solves nothing when they condescendingly discuss instances of black resistance.. As soon as black people protest or riot, Conservatives are quick to remind us that violence is not the answer. But this stance seems incompatible with military might being the best way for the US to get what it wants. To me, this would suggest some fundamental difference between the two situations. But in lieu of exploring all the possible explanations for that difference, I will just grant, for the moment, that violence is never the answer. But please keep in mind the blaring contradiction in the above positions.

Assuming violence is not the answer, black people, it would seem, should then use non-violent tactics to forward their interests. This doesn’t seem like an unreasonable stance (unless you consider that black people are routinely subject to violence from the state and private actors; but for the sake of this argument we’re going to also pretend that doesn’t happen).

Consider next that when Conservatives are willing to forego violent tactics, they still argue for firm stances. They say that if they we’re to interact with Putin, they would tell him what they wanted firmly and unequivocally. This is, again, just one manifestation of a larger traditionally Conservative platform which holds that one should stand strong to their values and be unwilling to let the forces that would detract from those values overcome their commitment (e.g. religion, family values, and adherence to market principles). Conservatives insist that people not be afraid to stand up for what they believe in, and moreover that they refused to be silenced.

But, the second black people start talking about racism (which is all they can do because we’ve agreed to be nonviolent) these same free speech loving individuals insist that black people soften their tones and lower their voices. Black people looking to forward their interests are told that being loud will only distract from their commitment, and insisting on certain points will only make it harder to recruit supporters and recognize when compromise is appropriate. But, when it comes to religious values or market adherence, compromise is, according to some Conservatives, never the answer (e.g. Kim Davis). Again, an option said to be super useful and important (like violence) is characterized as problematic and dangerous when it is employed to combat racism. But, again, let’s grant that black, in addition to being nonviolent, should also speak in a certain way so as to not alienate potential allies. Let’s also grant that black people should be more willing to compromise their beliefs about race.

Under this mold, black people can’t be violent and also can’t be too loud or too committed to their views in the exercise of their nonviolence. This is a little more restrictive, but still, there seems to be reasonable justifications for the suggestions.

Consider next that Conservatives have long argued, and still argue very strongly today, that a culture of entitlements and welfare creates individuals with depleted work ethic and a sense of being owed things they did not work for. This is, of course, just one manifestation of a larger traditionally Conservative idea that the society an individual lives in shapes that individuals character. This is, after all, why a lot of Conservatives insist on things like school prayer and abstinence only sex education. These policy ideas are, at least in part, motivated by a belief a person is susceptible to social forces and that regardless of individual feelings and motivations, a culture that promotes certain attributes will see an increase in those attributes.

But, as soon as a black person suggests that a culture of racism might be producing more racists (of course this suggestion is made nonviolently and not that loudly and not with too much conviction in the tone as we’ve agreed), that black person is said to be delusional or, worse yet, they are told that racism persists because they talk about it. Black people are told that racism, unlike work ethic, moral integrity, and personal responsibility, can only happen at the personal level and social institutions don’t significantly affect the existence of racism. Once again, a theoretical framework available to Conservatives to explain reality and suggest solutions for social problems, when applied to race, is said to be incoherent and unworkable. But, let’s grant that racism only happens at the personal level.

This new arrangement holds that black people have to nonviolently, not too loudly, without complete conviction, address racism, but they can’t appeal to larger social trends and other relevant social data. They must address racism only at the interpersonal level. These restrictions might be getting a little harder to justify.

Let’s now consider the Conservative’s favorite doctrine: personal responsibility. According to Conservatives, ultimately we are all responsible and should be held responsible for our actions. Conservatives tend to have little patience for psychological analysis or arguments about how poverty or social context might produce criminality. Instead, argue Conservatives, it is our responsibility to punish wrongdoers when they do harm, with very little room left for considerations intentionality and motivation.

But, the moment black people call out specific instances of interpersonal racism, they’re said to be overreacting. The wrongdoer in this case, is afforded every opportunity to explain away their actions, and justice, Conservatives argue, requires asking them for an apology (if that) and then accepting it and moving on. Gone is the doctrine of absolute personal responsibility. Harm is not enough to justify action. We have to ask whether they were joking, or whether they recognized the gravity of their remarks, or whether they were having a bad day.

I’m going to stop because this could go on forever. My point is this: it’s easy to see each of these demands that society places on black people as reasonable. But when you start to actually compile all the ways black people are expected to shape their conduct and speech when they talk about race, you quickly realize that the aggregate of these requirements makes it literally impossible to discuss race/racism or effect change. This problem is greatly exacerbated by the fact that only oppressed groups are asked to make these concessions. Violence is fine if we’re forwarding white interests (stand your ground, anyone?), convictions is fine and sternness of tone are fine when we’re forwarding white interests. Sociological explanations are fine when we’re chastising the poor and black people; personal responsibility is appropriate when justifying imprisoning young black casual drug-users. But when any of these strategies or modes of thinking are used to combat racism, suddenly they are inappropriate. If black people actually gave in to the systems demands they’re only option would be to forego combating racism altogether. There can be no choice where there is only one option. Please keep these things in mind as you observe and comment on the situations receiving attention at Mizzou and other schools. I say "receiving attention" instead of happening, because these events are happening accross the country. 

I understand that not every Conservative adheres to every position herein expressed. But as a society these messages are constantly projected at black people. Don’t believe me? Just ask one.

P.S. Don Lemon doesn’t count.






