Title: The Arrogance of Black Men
Category: Race
Date: 2015/10/15

Throughout my life I’ve often dealt with the accusation that I am arrogant (perhaps excessively so). This has routinely clashed with my own self-appraisal. As is the case with most highly stereotyped identities, I wondered to what extent the charge of arrogance was aimed specifically at my actions and statements or whether arrogance was a term used to describe the dissonance between my behaviors and the behaviors society thinks I should demonstrate. For more clarity as to what I mean, consider how women who speak up for themselves are called bitchy or pushy. Surely there are some women who can be too assertive (like their are some men who can be too assertive), but these titles are frequently attached to women who are being no more assertive than the average man would be in a similar circumstance. However, since women are expected to be docile and submissive, women who behave outside of that prefered mode receive these disapproving labels; perhaps with the intent to shame them into bringing their behavior in line with the preferred model of female behavior (whether or not this is intended or actually happens is not particularly relevant here). Basically, I’m wondering if the charge of arrogance frequently leveled at black men is similarly motivated (something I’m interested in independent of whether or not the term correctly applies to me...which it might).

The first step in this inquiry would be to see if it’s possible to discern a set of expected/preferred behaviors for black men that the term arrogant would be a sensible tool of chastisement to level at those who strayed too far from that set of behaviors. I think even the most cursory look at this nation’s history and contemporary governmental policy and public opinion suggests that such a situation does exist.

When slavery was the law of the land, black people were expected to humbly accept their predicament. Confidence among black men in the fields would have been seen as an immediate threat to the slave-master power structure since of course any person with a reasonable conception of self-worth would not want to be a slave and any person with a high sense of self-worth might foreseeably attempt to escape their predicament. Dissuading blacks from thinking too highly of themselves was every bit a part of slavery as the chains and whips which physical bound blacks to the land they slaved over.

Now one might argue that slavery was long ago abolished and has no bearing here. Obviously that’s not true, but I don’t think overlooking slavery’s contribution to the situation I’m exploring defeats the possibility that such a situation exists. We know, for example, that many of the tactics utilized during slavery were continued during and following Jim Crow and segregation. And, it’s worth noting, the aversion to black notions of self-worth was not exclusively about keeping them slaves. It also stemmed from racist conceptions of the value of black people as compared to white people. After all, we usually call people arrogant when they think of themselves more highly than they should. If we think of black people as of low value, almost any manifestation of confidence might appear to toe the line of arrogance.
This leads perfectly into what I think are the prevailing relevant social narratives surrounding the “black brand” (shout out to Damilare Oyefeso for the term). Black people are seen as lazy, sneaky moochers who thrive not by their abilities but by handouts and unearned promotions through affirmative actions. Given this characterization, the idea that a black person might dare to be self-assured might upset some people. Some even think, explicitly and tacitly, that black people should be bending at the waist all the times, thankful to the benevolent white man for any opportunity he receives. When this idea clashes with pride in one’s own efforts and a refusal to defer to other’s as the proximate cause of one’s success, arrogance seems to be the only appropriate term.

These things considered, I think the situation we are left with is one in which the objective parameters for what is popularly considered arrogance are expanded when applied to black action and attitudes. I know few black people who are as outrageous as Trump, and yet the same word used to describe him, i.e. arrogant, has been leveled against blacks, by my own observation, at a near immeasurable rate. And I don’t see a corresponding trend of calling white guys demonstrating similar behaviors arrogant.

One may counter here with a somewhat racist, but still worth examining, claim: *maybe black people are just more arrogant*. I respond to this idea with a question: are they naturally more arrogant, or socialized to be more arrogant? Obviously it would be racist to hold the first so one would would, if they simultaneously claim not to be racist (which they simply must because no one is racist in America, right?) necessarily hold that blacks are socialized to be more arrogant. If that’s true, then the next question is how are blacks socialized this way?

Here, I can already hear the hip-hop haters screaming at the top of their lungs that it’s the music that teaches these behaviors and promotes these arrogant attitudes. These commentators are joined by the broader scope of people who claim blacks don’t have good role-models, and instead turn to arrogant sports stars and musicians and follow their bad example. But that’s clearly not a good hypothesis because it doesn’t explain anything, only adding a degree of separation to the problem. After all, how did the musicians and athletes get that way. Other musicians and athletes? At what point do we actually discover the source of the problem of black arrogance or abandon the quest for a proximate cause all together?

The next hypothesis worth discussing is the idea that it’s a cultural institution. This hypothesis is similar, if not the same, sands a few words, as the culture of black violence arguments one may hear in other discussion. Much like the culture of violence argument and the hip-hop/role model argument above, this hypothesis doesn’t actually accomplish anything. It’s just a fancy way of saying “they’re just like that” without sounding racist. But, unfortunately, people who say stuff like that still sound pretty fucking racist.

The best guess I have for why blacks may have higher incidences of arrogance, if that’s true (something I’m highly skeptical of) would be this:

The black experience in America is one of constant frustration and abuse. Throughout this experience, a black person is forced to constantly re-evaluate their sense of self and self-worth. This predicament is so polarizing that blacks are left with two options: double down on self-love and do so unapologetically (what one may mischaracterize as arrogant) or accept society’s contention that they are not as significant or as important as their white counterpart. Given this dichotomy (which may be less exaggerated than I suggest here), we should applaud blacks who opt for the former option; not chastise and shame them. The idea of the arrogant black man or the strong black women are not jokes to be used to shame, they are, under this schema, necessary tools of survival; and shame on us for not recognizing that (you know, if that’s true).

Ultimately, I think it would be hard, if not impossible, to answer many of these questions. But I think it is at least worth considering whether or not black people, and men in particular, are being unfairly cast as arrogant when indeed they are simply being confident in a society that would rather they we’re not.

P.S. I think black women deal with different characterizations that may be informed by similar stereotypes and racist modalities. I, however, am significantly less qualified to speak on that issue because it involves an essential subjective element.
 
