Title: Black on Black Crime
Category: Race
Date: 2015/04/23

The argument I tackled last week, the suggestion that somehow hip hop causes police to murder unarmed black individuals, seldom leaves the house without its trusted sidekick: the black on black crime defense/excuse of police brutality.

The argument goes: police behavior is mostly justified, but the media exacerbates the problem by focusing on race. If people were actually concerned with violence against blacks and the extinguishment of black lives, they would turn their attention to the scores of black people killed by other black people. They do not. Therefore, the talk of police brutality is no more than race-baiting.

This argument has been tackled on several fronts, and yet it still persists. It might be the case that this argument lives on because there has been little attack launched at the argument's most obvious weaknesses. Most opponents of the argument attempt to show its incorrectness by explaining away the notion of black on black crime. These opponents are right to do so. The idea of black on black crime presupposes black criminality. It lives on the suggestion that somehow the crime amongst blacks directed at blacks is unique and inherent to blackness. But  that’s just not true. It is true that from 1976 to 2005, 94% of black victims were killed by another black person. But this figure resembles the 86% of white victims of violent crimes who were killed by other white people. Is it so crazy to imagine that criminals will commit crimes against the people they are in contact with, which in the United States because of *de facto* segregation, tends to be people of the same race as the criminal?

The ardent race-denier may counter by suggesting that black people as a whole kill more black people than white people kill white people. This person, however, is forgetting about the strong correlation between poverty, systemic abuse, undereducation, limited resources, and avenues for mobility, all those things, and crime. And, this person is further misremembering the American history that preceded The unfortunately decaying Civil Rights Act of 1964, and how it is in large part dominated by the subjugation and oppression of black individuals, America’s most impoverished group.

The evidence alone is enough to dispute the black on black crime narrative. But there are philosophical reasons why the black on black crime argument is terrible. For one, it completely misrepresents the attitude of black individuals toward crime. There are countless stop the violence rallies, tons of mothers who have lost sons and daughters and children who have lost parents and friends who cry out for the violence to end. Black people are not ignorant of crime, nor are they accepting of it. Black people, like most other people, want crime to stop, independent of the race of the victim and the race of the offender. To paint them otherwise is false and demeaning. That said, having a universal stance against murder should include murders committed by cops, too. Black people and other observers/critics of excessive police violence aren’t being hypocritical. They are actually being very consistent. They are observing instances of injustice and demanding they stop.

Perhaps the race-denier is oblivious of these efforts within the black community to combat crime because they are only interested in the murder of black individuals insofar as they can use it (poorly) as evidence that racism isn't a rampant force.

Secondly, and perhaps most importantly, cops are not criminals. Actually, we expect them to be the opposite. So, while it may not be particularly shocking that criminals are committing crimes and will continue to commit crimes, it certainly should be magnified and more intensely scrutinized that the men and women we entrust with our safety are killing individuals at an alarming rate, especially considering the killings are disproportionately happening to members of a historically oppressed group.

The concern with police violence and murders is surely a concern with black lives. But it is, furthermore, a concern with the materialization of systemic injustice. When agents of law and order, representatives of the state, are murdering and going unpunished at high instances, there is a problem. How is that not obvious? How could that be made less significant by observing that members of the same race of the murdered individuals die of other causes? Bringing up black on black crime (the myth that it is) is like bringing up heart disease. Yes black people die from heart disease...so fucking what! The police are literally killing people extrajudicially, OFTEN. That fact flies directly in the face of democracy and notions of due process that any person living in this country should hope to protect at all cost lest we end up in Nazi Germany (and I am not being hyperbolic here). Yes criminals kill black people, too. But, are we that comfortable with our police officers undertaking criminal behavior?

P.S. I’ve also seen people defending cops on the basis that these kinds of things don’t happen often; suggesting most cops are good, and most bad cops don’t get away with it (I’m skeptical of this claim) and thus there is not problem. I wonder how well that argument would be received by the parents and children and friends of the many, many murder individuals. One time is too many. There has been way more than one time.
