Title: Choosing A Team
Category: Political Philosophy
Date: 2017/06/01
 
George Washington, in his Farewell Address after his second term as President, famously warned that though “[political parties] may now and then answer popular ends, they are likely in the course of time and things, to become potent engines, by which cunning, ambitious, and unprincipled men will be enabled to subvert the power of the people and to usurp for themselves the reins of government, destroying afterwards the very engines which have lifted them to unjust dominion.”
 
Is that not where we find ourselves today? How foolish do Republicans look falling in line to defend and support one of history's most incompetent elected officials? Why? Because he, too is a Republican.
 
And, while Donald Trump represents the most palpable example of Washington’s point, even without Trump, our gridlocked Congress, corrupt politicians, and divided society all illustrate why Washington was right about the potential dangers of political parties.
 
Now, I am not so naive as to think that a Law Student writing a blogpost will undermine the party system which is embedded deep in the fabric of American government, I am hopeful that for those who read it, this post will provide an opportunity to reflect on just how bad things have gotten and how possible it is for things to be different.
 
The ability to assemble is a great American privilege. The importance of our ability to unite with like-minded individual cannot be overstated. Moreover, it is reasonable to contend that political parties are natural extensions of that privilege. But the right to assemble, as I understand it, is about our ability to unite behind causes, not behind colors, icons, and platitudes. Political parties, reduced to their purest forms, are just that. Whatsmore, few people would testify that either political party perfectly captures their preferences on all social issues. I’m not even sure that’s possible in a two-party system, but the point stands: by pledging our allegiance to a party we are necessarily compromising some of our values.

Some may respond that it is better to compromise on a few values than to render oneself completely voiceless by opting out of party allegiance. I understand this point but I think it is a false dichotomy motivated by political laziness. Educating yourself on the spectrum of issues and coming to informed positions is empowering. An informed voting populace can use the right to assemble to communicate to politicians what stances would generate the most support. The party system, on the other hand, allows many politicians to be vague or outright dishonest about their stances with the hope of capturing votes with the dragnet of party loyalty.
 
But the worse thing political parties do is force us to choose a team; to be a D or an R. In this scheme, the other side becomes the enemy. It sometimes can be less about seeing your hopes actualized in government and more about keeping the other side from having power. The obstructionism demonstrated by both sides over the last decade is evidence of that. Just listen to an a Democrat or Republican discuss the other. The disdain in their voice, the disgust often evident on their face. But the thing is, their are so few true Republicans and true Democrats outside of Washington. People have diverse values all over this country. But that diversity is blurred--perhaps even erased--by the party label. Calling one a democrat or a republican enables others to make broad assumptions about a person’s stances and their motivations for those stances which will very often prove to be incorrect. And these assumptions often act as the basis for disdain.
 
I, like Washington, see the efficiency political parties create. But I refuse to relinquish the greatness of America in the name of efficiency. I simply hope Washington’s full quote comes to fruition and the cunning, ambitious, and unprincipled man currently in the White House destroys the very engines which has lifted him to unjust dominion.
 
P.S. If you support Trump in the name of party loyalty, you should be ashamed of yourself. If you support Trump because your values align with his, you are very likely an idiot or evil. Maybe both. If you support Trump because you think he represents the best chance of success for you and people like you, you’re wrong.
