Title: Deliberative Theory
Category: Political Philosophy
Date: 2015/07/09

It’s not uncommon to find someone who is deeply skeptical of the “let’s talk about it” approach. These individuals see the constant advocacy for “open honest conversation” on a plethora of topics as ultimately a waste of time; either because it just creates space for whining in place of other, perhaps more effective forms of democratic organization and mobilization (e.g. writing petitions, visiting Senators, protesting) or because conversation, while cathartic, will ultimately fail to produce any substantive changes. These skeptics, maybe unwittingly, at launching criticism at a very powerful, entrenched democratic concept: deliberative theory.

Deliberative theory (DT) is the idea that ordinary citizens, by participating in civil society and partaking in discussions about society, can help shape that society by introducing ideas to and shaping ideas in the social imaginary (the realm of things we can talk about), creating a critical mass of murmuring about a particular topic sufficient to inspire those in positions of political power to deal with the issues surrounding that idea.

A proponent of DT might look to the recent resolution to remove the confederate flag from South Carolina’s capital as evidence of DT’s prowess. People began to complain that the flag was inappropriate and racist in origin. There were substantive debates on the meaning of the flag and its place in southern heritage. And, rather quickly, the chatter reached a critical mass influencing the elected officials of South Carolina to take the flag down.

Make no mistake about, Deliberative theory is as old as any democratic institution. While it may have only recently come under the name Deliberative theory, the exact ideas behind the theory are what inspired the third, fourth, and fifth clause of the First Amendment: “Congress shall make no law...abridging the freedom of speech, or the press, or the right of the people to peaceably assemble...”. As Brandeis and Holmes explain in their monumental concur/dissent opinion in *California v. Whitney* (1927), “[t]hose who won our independence believed that the final end of the State was to make men free to develop their faculties, and that, in its government, the deliberative forces should prevail over the arbitrary.” The two men went on to explain in that “freedom to think as you will and to speak as you think are means indispensable to the discovery and spread of political truth; that, without free speech and assembly, discussion would be futile; that, with them, discussion affords ordinarily adequate protection against the dissemination of noxious doctrine.”

As brilliant as Brandeis, Holmes, and other DT subscribers are, there is still a need to examine DT because, as is often the case with philosophy and political theory, changes in time and circumstance can change the validity of a doctrine. That said, let’s return to the two criticism from earlier.

The first criticism, that DT just leads to whining in place of more substantive democratic activity, seems obviously wrong. For one, the characterization of deliberation as whining (admittedly my word choice but certainly not a foreign depiction to many critics) suggests a lack of concern or empathy for the the potentially aggrieved. To suggest people advocating for increased conversation about the issues that are important to them are whining, is to dismiss their ideas without giving them any actual consideration. That’s less a criticism of DT and more a personality defect; a clear expression of privilege: to have things so good that listening to others “complain” in the hopes of change is just too bothersome. 

Also, I strongly object to the idea that there is a more substantive democratic activity than deliberation (except for voting). What will protesters say if they don’t first deliberate on what their grievances is and what their message will be? How are we to know there is any hope of crafting a society around an idea if we do not first see if the idea is communicable, operationalizable, and, most importantly, correct? And lastly, why exactly do you cherish free speech if the exercise of the speech is subsequently deemed “insubstantial”?

The second criticism, that DT will fail to produce change, is obviously false. Deliberation desegregated schools, took down the confederate flag, got women the right to vote, got gays the right to marry. Our society can always be improved and DT is an indispensable instrument for the improvement.

But…

I do have one big problem with DT that most of its most ardent supporters seem intent on looking over: some people are excluded from the conversation and others refuse to partake.

For the first, I imagine that if the slaves had been consulted they would have asked for a drastically different handling of the 150 years following freedom. My point, sometimes we don’t realize, or refuse to recognize, that not all voices in our society are treated equally. In fact, because of recent changes in campaign finance, I dare say the pipeline of discussions to action on the part of our representatives may be choked off by the most powerful (read: wealthiest) lobbies. For deliberative theory to work at it’s best, there actually has to be some semblance of equal opportunity to permeate the ideas generated in conversations around the country into the official democratic institutions of our society. The increased role of big money in our politics may be decreasing the permeability of the barrier between the two. And, while I don’t think money is speech (I’m looking at you again *Citizens United*), I do think, in the realm of politics, there is an important relationship between the two.

Moreover, we, as a society, need to be less swift in dismissing minority opinions and ideas we disagree with. That our congress has never launch an investigation into the necessity and feasibility of reparations is a clear example of Deliberative Theory failing to work because some voices are not appraised highly enough. The same can be said for pay equity. Deliberative Theory is only true if the deliberation is actually meaningful. 
So, we’re left with the question: how do we make ignored voices count? That could be a post in and of itself...and next week it will be.

With respect to some being unwilling to partake, I don’t know what to do. My post from two weeks ago, “Can We Talk About It?”, suggests some hypotheses that may explain why some refuse to, well, talk about it. The immediate reaction may be to say, “well fuck em.” But that won’t cut it. DT, as I explained when addressing the last point, is thoroughly reliant on the quantity of voices seriously entertained. If segments of the population won’t “play ball” then I’m afraid what we are left with is sparse isolated conversations. Also, obviously, the more people talking about something, the more attention that subject will receive. And, while social media has made some conversations inescapable, it still doesn’t force people to participate and participation is kind of the whole point.

So let’s go ahead and talk about it. Let’s keep having open, honest conversations, and let’s continue to enjoy the perpetual progress our society is making. No, our society isn’t perfect, and there is a lot of work to be done, but we all have a role to play in that transformation; and, despite what the skeptics say, we all do have a role to play.

P.S. Senator and Presidential candidate Bernie Sanders is perhaps the only candidate who has taken an unambiguous stance on *Citizens United*. That case is a direct affront to American Democracy and I believe it lays the groundwork for an oligarchy.

