Title: The Don Lemon Effect
Category: Social Justice
Date: 2015/11/05

Obviously, there are people who have no strong opinions about racism who prefer to keep it that way. These individuals, frankly, don’t really care whether or not racism is real; usually because it either doesn’t affect them or they think if it is real, it is too substantial a thing for them to affect it. Both of these stances are mistaken of course. Racism affects us all (some positively, some negatively) and mitigating racism’s influence within our society is a task that necessarily involves the choices made by individual actors. I say all this to ultimately exclude these individuals from the discussion. I think the Don Lemon Effect and its impact are best demonstrated by focusing on people who are ambivalent about racism’s existence but are still at least mildly interested in knowing whether or not racism is real and still socially and politically relevant.

At the conclusion of the civil rights era, whether or not racism still existed sufficiently to be a social force was something reasonable minds could and did disagree about. At the time, many people understood racism only in its popular and institutional forms. What I am calling popular racism (some call it basic racism or interpersonal racism) is the conception of racism almost all people accept. This doctrine holds that racism is a matter of the opinions and biases of individuals. This is unquestionably at least part of the equation for explaining what constitutes racism in our society.

Some have tried to restrict racism to only popular racism. This position is anchored by the belief that institutional racism (i.e. racist laws and racist governmental actions) were done away with by Constitutional amendments (i.e. Amendments 13, 14, and 15) and other laws (e.g. the recently depleted Voting Rights Act of 1965 and the famous Civil Rights Acts of 1964 and 1991) which explicitly forbid the government from using race to cause harm to certain identified groups. 

This is where disagreement begins. Some people, myself included, have argued that institutional racism is very much still real. Through the use of coded language, indirect assault (think mandatory minimums), and the personal biases of agents of government, the government still manages to perpetuate racism throughout our society and also continues to use race to cause harm to certain groups. For some people, however, disparities in policing, sentencing, and resource allocation, as well as the excessive scapegoating of blacks and other minorities communities (most recently hispanic immigrants and before them muslim Americans) is not enough to overcome the fact that very few laws explicitly/transparently single out particular races for disparate treatment.

Disagreement continues, and reaches its height, when we move into the area of structural racism. This is the most complicated and most insidious form racism takes. Structural racism is the phenomenon by which individual, non-governmental actors, allow their popular racism to influence their decision-making (this has to do with how we engage with one another, who gets hired, who gets heightened scrutiny of their actions, who gets promoted, who gets blamed, who gets fired first, etc.); and often this influence is not known to the actor because the actor is unaware the biases exist. Individual cases in which this happens can usually be explained by appealing to some factor other than race that would make it seem race is not pertinent. But, when one looks at these interactions on longitudinal and cross-sectional scales, one can see that these actions actually predictably lead to blacks and other minority groups predictably facing disparate treatment. 

The complexity of structural racism is that it can only ever be observed at the structural level via the consequences of choices made by individuals. For example, if one employer tends to not hire black people, it’s unfortunate but not that big of a deal. If, however, our society is full of employers who mostly don’t hire black people, or don’t promote black people then black people, at large, will likely have diminished prospects which is a racist outcome we can expect because of structural racism. Put more simply, structural racism is the consequence of the fact that the people who make up the social structures and private institutions within our society are racist in the popular sense, meaning they have biases against black people. For this reason, some people, unwilling to look beyond the actions of individual agents, can’t and won’t see the obvious truth that structural racism exists.

Structural racism is an important concept in the fight against racism because it shows how popular racism at the individual level can create large disparities in our society without the government or any other person undertaking conduct that we would traditionally call racist (e.g. slavery, Jim Crow, and segregation). Structural racism provides the missing link between the apparent absence of racism and the racially disparate outcomes that are depressingly common within our society. It also explains why, while whites can certainly be subject to popular racism, they cannot be victims of structural racism (or the racism that actual has an effect beyond hurting feelings) because detrimental stereotypes about white people as white people are not pervasive enough in our society as to lead to disparate outcomes for white people. People who consciously or unconsciously hate white people, are just not overwhelmingly represented within the positions of power throughout our society and thus the white hating sentiment doesn’t really have much impact beyond person to person interactions. This isn’t to say it doesn’t matter that white people face popular racism, it just doesn’t matter as much as the fact that minorities face the much more destructive institutional and structural racisms.

Fortunately, convincing individuals of structural racisms impact, though hard, is not impossible. Usually, convincing people that structural racism exists (and also convincing people that institutional racism exists in this new form) is a matter of showing them the statistics that help validate the theory and also supplementing those facts with the fact that every survey ever done (2008 Gallup Poll, 2015 HuffPost poll, 2006 CNN Poll, and please believe this list really could go on *ad infinitum*) shows that about 80% of black people are constantly and perpetually aware that racism is a real and constant threat to their prospects and their well being.

So you may be wondering how Don Lemon factors into all of this. Well here goes nothing:

Individuals like Don Lemon, Raven-Symoné, and Ben Carson, play a particularly important and detrimental role in this whole scheme of acknowledging and denying racism. When Don Lemon goes on television and preaches that black people are to blame for their predicament because they don’t value school enough, because they sag their pants, because they use cell phones in school, because they loot and riot, because they use the N-Word; when Raven Symone says that exotic (read: black) names warrant discrimination in hiring; when Ben Carson says it is our obsession with race and not racism that divides us: when these people say these and many other things, it is much more harmful than any rant Bill O’Reilly will ever have, more harmful than any speech any Ku Klux Klansman could ever give.

Why?

Because these individuals are black and they are also successful. When they say that race doesn’t necessarily hinder your ability to be successful, they appear to be proving their statement simply by existing. Bill O’Reilly (and his cohorts) will only ever end the debate when the people involved in the debate already agree with him. When the viewership is undecided, Rush Limbaugh is just another voice. Don Lemon, on the other hand, is readily available, easy to understand evidence of the claims he makes as he makes them, and, as such, he is infinitely more dangerous than any overt racist could ever be. Simply by existing, Don Lemon casts reasonable doubt on whether or not structural racism exists. It is not his success but instead his understanding of his success that actually creates the problem.

Furthermore, when Don Lemon, Raven-Symoné, Ben Carson, and relevant others speak, they do so from a platform unavailable to most people in general, but particularly rare for blacks. As a result, people are likely to take them as authorities. We tend to think the wisest and most talented amongst us are those who end up at the top (some call this the myth of a pure meritocracy). Were this claim true, and many people think it is, the aforementioned individuals would be the pinnacle of blackness and as such would seem to demand their views be taken seriously. Especially when these individuals tend to present their positions in ways that are not only easy to understand but also often stroke the ego of the listener who is told that it’s not their fault and they are not racist (compare that to the very complex ideas behind the theory of structural racism and the much less attractive message of structural racism: casual biases lead to terrible racialized outcomes).

The Don Lemon Effect is the consequence of empowered black people shifting the blame for the racial disparities in our society back on to the oppressed. The Don Lemon’s of the world provide an easy-to-accept package for the arguments often made by race deniers and more importantly actual do present a very compelling reason to believe that race problems in this country would go away if black people would shape up and stop complaining, much like Don Lemon himself claims to have done. Simply by existing, Don Lemon and the like, would seem to falsify the theory of structural racism.

But they don’t, they just appear to. Structural racism doesn’t hold that no black person can ever be successful. Indeed, structural racism depends on some black people being successful. What allows us to ignore structural racism, and thus allows it to persists even though as a society our official message is that racism is bad, is that some black people do get through the cracks. If no black people ever were successful we’d notice and do something about it (I’d hope). Structural racism only holds that at large, black people are less likely to be able to exploit the opportunities in our society; something that is statistically undeniable given the routine underrepresentation of blacks in prominent positions and disproportionate representation of blacks with respect to our prison system, police killings, and poverty.

Here’s a rough example of how The Don Lemon Effect actually works: You have a person undecided about racism. They see and hear Don Lemon. They think this: ”Don Lemon is a well-spoken, well dressed black person in a prominent position. He says he got here by being respectable and respectful and he implores other blacks to do the same. If that is true other blacks must not be respectable and respectful otherwise they would be here. I do see a lot of not respectable black people on the news. I guess racism doesn’t exist and instead it really is just a matter of cultural problems within the black community that keeps them from being like Don Lemon.” The weird thing about this thought process is that it fails to consider that Don Lemon is not the only “respectable black person” in our society. Many other “good blacks” are in prison, or low-level management jobs, or dead at the hands of police and many others are indeed in great positions. There is variance. But the overwhelming trend even for “respectable blacks is not positive. They earn less than their white counterparts for starters and they are also much less likely to be promoted.

The Don Lemon Effect is the *prima facie* validation of the alternate hypothesis that black people suffer in our society because they choose it or because they deserve it. As such, it is one of the most detrimental phenomenon within our society. Especially since it further distorts the fact that no individual could ever confirm or disprove the existence of structural racism. It’s about looking at the trends. The Don Lemon Effect restricts many people’s ability to do that and instead makes enemies out of undecideds who could have been allies.

P.S. I recognize and agree that black individuals can undertake actions to improve their predicament. Racism, however, adds an arbitrary, sometimes insurmountable, obstacle, and that, independent of the outcome of any particular black life, is unjust.


