Title: Racist Double Talk
Category: Race
Date: 2016/06/09

When speaking, it is often more beneficial to attempt to communicate your message indirectly. You may want to convey a message to only a section of your audience, using indirect speech to exclude the unwanted listeners; you may want to ask or say something a party you’re talking to might find offensive, and indirect speech gives you the opportunity to float out the invite or idea and retreat if they’re uninterested or offended; or you might be trying to pass along a coded message meant only for members of a certain group, and using indirect speech is your way of figuring out if a particular person(s) belongs to that group. Whatever it is that motivates veiled locution, or perlocution, indirect speech is indispensable to efficient covert communication in our society.

And we’re really good at it, too. We ask people to “Netflix and Chill.” We tell people we’ll see if we can make it. Sometimes we just need to “work on ourselves” and that’s the reason our relationship must end. Surely, when we say these things, we’re not always being insincere or duplicitous. For that exact reason, we are able to occasionally avoid the consequences of directly acknowledging our intentions by positing one of those, or any other similar, statements in place of the words that might better capture our true message. The hope: get the thing we want, without taking more risk than is necessary.

But, as with most things, the potential for abuse and vicious misuse is omnipresent. For example, indirect probing is a common tactic utilized by those with racially insensitive viewpoints to communicate their bigotry in a way that isn’t immediately identifiable. Sometimes, this happens simply because a person is racist but has learned over time to hide it in more appropriate words. Repeatedly chastised, the aggrieved racist will simply pick a new word to use to refer to those despised. Nigger, became colored, became African American, became black, most recently became “of color.” Soon, I promise, “of color” will be replaced by some equally meaningless attempt to avoid the scourge the term will come to represent after it is adopted by swaths of malicious double talkers.

At its worst, though, racist double talk is used to send out beacons during conversation to see if one’s conversational partner shares the same racist opinions and beliefs. Seems spectacular, I know, but I’d be shock if none of my readers find what comes next a little familiar.

It starts with the indirect probe; the causal throw away statement that invites inquiry but could be ignored very easily. A friend of mine and I were discussing this topic recently after a conversation he had reminded him of a practice that he had been familiarized with growing up and receiving schooling in several segments of the south (though do not believe that this practice is unique to the south, or even that it is necessarily more prevalent there).

My friend was talking with some old friends when one of them mentioned that they were undertaking a teaching fellowship. They lamented over the fact that they might have to work at “one of those schools.” My friend, unwilling to play along, immediately questioned what his friend’s statement was implying. The suspected double-talker, immediately retreated suggesting she simply meant she’d had particular preferences about where she’d like to teach. My friend continued to push, ultimately getting his interlocutor to acknowledge the racial implications of her initial statement and, kudos to him, he redirected the discussion to cover charities and policies that could be used to bolster inner-city schools.

Personally, I think my friend might have been a little quick on the draw. “One of those schools”, though obviously able to be interpreted in a bigoted way, could also refer to many other kinds of preferences that are wholly unrelated to any kind of racial bias, like a desire to avoid one of those schools with too much administrative oversight or one of those schools with too lopsided a curriculum in favor of math and sciences or one of those schools in a district that has adopted common core. All those statements have nothing to do with race.

On the other hand, it cannot be ignored that my friend was right. He heard a statement his experience has taught him is often a disguise for racism, and he acted. In a similar situation, I had to let a lot more time pass before I could be sure.

It was during my Freshman year at Lafayette. I was playing video games with someone who lived on the same floor as I did. A nice guy I had conversed with many times. I enjoyed his company. In the course of our gameplay, this friend turned to me and said I was a really smart person. I thanked him and refocused on the game. He then asked if I was raised around a lot of smart people. I told him that I was from the kind of place where opportunity to demonstrate intelligence is scarce and thus I couldn’t be sure of the academic prowess of my peers throughout my education. He then asked if I thought more opportunity would help. I said for sure but that there was more to it than that. He agreed and then asked if I knew that black kids did worse in school. I said I was aware of an achievement gap. Then he asked, “Yea, so it’s fair to say black people are stupider, right?”

What happened in this situation, is all too common, and is also very likely what would have happened in my friend’s situation had he a less keen sense of such double talk or more patience for it. First a probe is sent out. This probe is meant to set the stage for the discussion. If the probe is met with hostility or is too evenly received, the mission may be abandoned or another less veiled probe may be sent. It’s as simple as disliking “these types of neighborhoods” as opposed to disliking “the people that live in these types of neighborhoods.” Both options offer an escape, but one, by identifying people specifically, has a smaller domain of alternative explanations.

Conversely, when the probe is received kindly or the inquiry that follows the probe is inviting or friendly (my standard response when I think someone is racially double-talking), the indirect speaker then begins a process of escalation and decoding until the speaker is confronted by the listener or until the listener reveals themselves as a closet racists and the racist rhetoric that the new millennium is said to have exterminated is exchanged with colonial velocity.

I must admit, however, I’ve been in many situations where I could have interpreted a statement as an indirect probe. But, after a little conversation, it was revealed that it was one of those times when the speaker wasn’t trying to double-talk so much as just discussing a controversial topic sensitively. I think there isn’t enough acknowledgement of those who would likely to be allies but can’t keep up with the ever morphing liberal lingo. Nothing to me is more foolish than refusing to partner with people equally committed to your cause because they can’t keep up with the shifting shibboleths.

I also don’t mean to draw parallels to discussions of microaggressions. I think a lot of tension is produced when we assume at the outset that a particular statement or group of statement has a designated meaning that is inherently or necessarily instrumentally offensive. If anything, recognizing that people can mean an array of things with the same word combination should give pause to anyone who suggests they can know a speaker’s true intention simply by positing the words they used and differences in race or gender that may be present. What I’m describing here is a framework for navigating potentially charged situations and uncovering covert bigotry. The science of microaggression, on the other hand, is a strategy of nonstop deliberate misunderstanding, hypersensitivity, and bottomless chastisement for even the most mild offenses. Just doesn’t seem that productive to me.

Nonetheless, I’m highlighting this phenomenon not to incite paranoia that every person is secretly racist (it’s not a secret) or that all speakers are trying to sneak something by you. I just think understanding that this is a very real and frequent occurrence in our society may help some people who can’t understand why black people “play the race card.”

In a society with a history of insidious tactics of oppression and with contemporary practices of coded speech and rampant denial of true intentions, how could you expect an individual from a historically abused group subject to those sneaky contemporary practices to not slowly become accustomed to assuming offense was intended? Especially when offense is so often intended even if hidden.

We owe it to each other to be vigilant in these situations. Let them develop, and  when/if the conversation takes an ugly turn do what Kirk did with his friend from the outset or what did in that conversation with that guy in college:

Me: *Whoa, why did you think that you could say something like that to me?*
Him: *Wait, I didn’t…*
Me: *Relax! No I don’t think black people are stupider, I think that intelligence is determined by a lot of factors and race has never been shown to be one of them. There is a lot of evidence, however, to suggest deteriorating schools, poverty, overcrowding, and perpetual policing and harassment adversely affect educational outcomes. I’m assuming you asked your question out of concern, so I’m wondering, “what do you think we can do to fix those problems”*

The conversation didn’t go on too much longer after that. But my point should be fairly obvious by now. If we are to defeat racism and the other ailments that plague our minds and divide our society we need to address it at its sources and not continue to remedy symptoms as they become too disruptive to ignore. Instances of double, though troubling, provide the perfect opportunity, if we can be patient, to confront those who still have antiquated racial beliefs and sentiments in a setting that doesn’t allow for an easy escape once the double-talk has been abandoned. Whenever I sweep my house, I always turn the lights on. Similarly, if we are to get rid of racism, we’re going to need to see it.

P.S. Two things: first, I learned from my friend that he experiences those kinds of conversations a lot when he’s amongst exclusive white company. This seems intuitively probable since the consequences of racist double talk are likely less severe in homogenous company. I, similarly, may experience more double-talk to see if I’m a Don Lemon type.

Second, that conversation at Lafayette, unfortunately, taught me that I really could never be sure if a white person had secret racist thoughts. White friends, imagine the true weight of that statement. And then know it is likely true for many of your black friends. And then, maybe, ask yourself how you can help. 
