Title: Feminists Think They're So Smart
Date: 2015/01/08
Category: Feminism

Feminism has one core claim. There are different strands of Feminism, but the core claim captures the common thread between them all, and anything not sharing in this claim is, by definition not, Feminism. This claim represents the necessary and sufficient conditions for Feminism, without further necessitating how any particular feminist need express his/her beliefs. 

The core claim of feminism is that men and women should enjoy the same rights, privileges, and opportunities in a just and preferable society. One may immediately move to suggest we don't need Feminism because everyone believes that already. Well (1) that's not true and (2) even if it were true, women don't currently enjoy the consequences of that belief which is kind of the whole point of the belief. Furthermore, this claim should not be taken to mean that men and women should be treated the same. But the differences in treatment should be limited to those necessitated by genetic difference (e.g. the need for different kinds of doctors). Obviously this might suggest to a skeptic that men and women can be treated drastically differently as a result of their differing biology. But this idea is counteracted by a common thesis many feminists subscribe to.

That thesis can be articulated expediently like so: there are few intrinsic differences between men and women. This thesis is not meant to suggest there are no intrinsic differences (hello, penises) and this claim also doesn't rule out men and women being different as a result of social forces (i.e. you can't reject this claim simply because you observe men and women acting differently). Though I don't intend to argue for this claim here, I will say there is good reason to at least consider taking it seriously, since humans have very little sexual dimorphism compared to other species, a fact that goes against conventional (always read: ungrounded) wisdom.

The core claim and the aforementioned thesis comprise the backbone of much of what is called Feminism, but there is certainly a lot of divergent thought. This is where I think Feminism loses some of its clout. I do, however, think Feminism has historically dropped the ball on caring for all women. Black and transgender women were both ignored by earlier feminist advocacy initiatives. Fortunately, like any good theory, feminism has improved over time and recent waves of Feminism have been more considerate of intersectionalityand global problems (also, to people who might say first-world women's problems shouldn't be our concern because women in other countires are facing more serious problems, I simply wonder who taught you that justice was a zero-sum entity for which only the most intense problems were eligible). 

P.S. I was going to further use this post to explain all the amazing things Feminism has done for my life and the way I relate to women, but I decided against it. Feminism isn't about my life. Feminism isn't about me. The reason Feminism exists is because too many things in society are predicated on my convenience. Also, I'm not a feminist because of the benefits to myself. I'm a feminist, well, because I believe men and women should enjoy the same rights, privileges, and opportunities in a just and preferable society. Do you?

