Title: Feminist Climate Change
Category: Feminism
Date: 2016/01/14

Three percent of scientists don’t believe in climate change. That’s how this claim is often cached, but it’s more accurate to say that of all the scientific papers ever published that take a position on climate change, 3% do not admit or explicitly deny that human behavior contributes to the rising global temperatures and increased greenhouse gases in the environment. A mouth full, but for the sake of accuracy, I think the truth should be spoken instead of its expedient doppleganger.

Much the same, some feminists, like those climate-change denying scientists, have lost their way. Either because of personal bias or bad information, some feminists have taken on positions that are completely untenable. Worst yet, some of these positions have grown legs, and by the day more and more people are buying into what I’ll call "popular feminism,”  as contrasted with academic feminism or critical feminist theory.

This strand of feminism, not large enough to constitute a new wave (yet?), but too large to be ignored, has near completely rejected attempts at objective reasoning and has also resigned itself to understanding all matters exclusively from the female perspective. It is every bit as irrational as the sexism it looks to combat. But, why attack pop feminism in the abstract when we can examine the claims that are problematic?

The first, which is obviously problematic, is that a woman can be raped without being touched. No, she can’t. Surely a woman can be made to feel uncomfortable without being touched. But rape necessarily involves some kind of forcible touching or subversion of one’s ability to consent through incapacitation. Though there is significant disagreement about how much touching is necessary to constitute a rape, touching is a necessary feature of the crime. To understand rape any other way would be to trivialize the accounts of real survivors and would further lead to criminalizing individuals for conduct that may be socially unbecoming but should not be criminal.

The claim would seem completely absurd if it didn’t exist in the context of a society that is deeply entrenched in debates over where seduction ends and where coercion begins. Much of pop feminism leaves no place for seduction at all. The proponents of the affirmative consent standard come to mind. These individuals claim that an assault happens in every sexual encounter that is not initiated with an unequivocal affirmation that one is willing to partake in the sex act being undertaken. But, that’s not how sex works all the time. Sometimes passions flare and people screw. I’ve already talked about the role alcohol can play in this equation in “Alcohol and Sex.” Any one of a million other nuances of sexual encounters can be pointed to show why exclusive affirmative consent is a bad standard.

The misguided nature of this platitude is further evidenced by the fact that many affirmative consent advocates put the onus entirely on the man to gain consent. Ironically, it is these individuals who illustrate women as lacking the necessary agency to make decisions and be held responsible for them. And, worse yet, this standard leaves open the possibility for any person who later regrets a sexual encounter to falsely accuse their partner of sexual misconduct. Which leads into my next grievance with pop feminism.

Pop feminism also holds that women claim rape so infrequently they should always be believed when they accuse someone, further holding that any skepticism or inquiry for more information contributes to a culture that increases the instances of rape and decreases the instances of punishment for that crime. I understand the motivation for this sentiment. It is a great tragedy every time a person is forced to have sex against their will and then is disbelieved or shamed for having undergone the ordeal. Another large tragedy is a person who didn’t ever commit that heinous crime being convicted in the court of public opinion and receiving penalties like expulsion from school or jail time.

The aforementioned position is informed by bad information, i.e. that only 2% to 8% of rape accusations are false. Posts that refer to this statistic often cite a 2010 study for the figures. I looked over the study. Here’s what it showed...indeed only 6% of rape accusations in the study were provably false, but 44.9% of the episodes didn’t proceed for various reasons (i.e. uncooperative accuser, the incident happened but was deemed not an assault, there wasn’t enough evidence, and other reasons). Moreover, only 36% of the cases actually led to a finding that the person accused was guilty of the crime. So, for accuracy’s sake, it might be best to state the claim as such: When a woman claims to be raped, 2% t0 8% of those claims can be immediately proven false. The other 98% to 92% didn’t necessarily happen; they require further investigation. Further investigation is exactly what people who ask for more information are calling for.

I think some feminists, only concerned with the well-being of women, don’t realize the consequence of loosening the definition of rape and simultaneously presuming guilt anytime a woman points the finger. Historically, black men have been routinely falsely accused of rape as a way to subject them to the justice system and lynch-mobs. These men were all denied due process. Pop feminism calls for something similar. 

And, indeed, that is what we’re getting. Think about the Duke Lacrosse case, the Rolling Stone fiasco over the UVA alleged rape, and now the case at Findlay University, where two black students were expelled for raping a girl who many sources confirm bragged about the encounter for many days; granted this doesn’t mean she wasn’t raped, but that these two men were expelled in these circumstances is completely unacceptable, but completely to be expected in this new climate. A system that calls more things rape and provides less opportunity for exculpation will necessarily produce more criminals. And, given our racist society, those criminals will be mostly black men and the poor.

Surely, however, rape still remains underreported and rapists are convicted not nearly enough. But let’s find ways to combat those injustices without creating new ones.

The wage gap is another area where pop feminism has flexed its irrational muscles. Despite many studies proving the wage gap, if it exists, is not as large as many feminists claim, it still comes up all the time. An Atlantic article from 2013 stated what many studies have also claimed, when you control for hours worked, career, and experience, women and men make roughly the same thing. Women’s wages, on average, however, are lower because they dominate lower-paying jobs. But even that fact is quickly changing as women aged 25-34 make 93% of what their male counterparts make when not controlling for any of the previously mentioned variables, according to the Washington Post. For white women, that figure is closer to 98%. As more women enter STEM jobs and supervisory positions, the wage gap, by almost all metrics is becoming a site of victory not a cause for concern.

But there are still areas of concern of course. Women still don’t reach CEO status as often as men and our society is embarrassingly lacking in paid family leave protocols to aid women with children. Both these things represent important areas for feminist advocacy, but they are not seeing the attention they should be because pop feminist are still obsessing over a wage gap that is only a cosmetic problem.

So, you might be wondering why I brought up scientists and climate change. Well, just because some scientists are mistaken, doesn’t mean I’m going to relinquish my allegiance to science. I believe very strongly in a rational approach to the world shepherded by observation, falsifiable hypotheses, and repeated experimentation.

And…

I believe in equality for women and men. I believe there are systemic barriers (fewer than in the past but still many) between women and full participation in our democracy and our society. I believe a patriarchal social system exists that privileges men over women. And, just because some have perverted the title to mean other things, I recognize that being a feminist only means subscribing to the beliefs I just acknowledged having. So, despite how bad I think pop feminism is, I am still a feminist.

To those of you who say you believe in equality but you refuse to call yourself feminist to avoid the stigma the title may bring, I ask you: have you abandoned science because some people think it goes against God? Letting the intransigence of others dictate your behavior is much less noble than you imagine and refusing to join the ranks of an important movement for semantic reasons is pathetically childish. Feminism is a good thing even if some feminists are bad at it.

P.S. I will admit here that this post was almost titled , Feminist No More, but then I recognized the contradiction that would be created if I said I wasn’t a feminist but that I believed in equality for men and women. I don’t do contradictions. I implore you to not do the same.
