Title: A Persistent Mistake In the Advocacy of Gay Rights
Date: 2015/01/15

It's unfortunate that a movement as important as the gay rights movement still flaunts an argument as bad as the "gay-by-nature" argument.

The appeal of the following proposition is obvious: if gays and lesbians cant help but be gays and lesbians, it would be unjust to use that fact to deny them certain benefits and make them victims of certain punishments.

An obvious way to undermine this reasoning is to ask if a particular disposition always excuses one from legal scrutiny. Clearly the answer is no. We dont grant pedophiles legal impunity nor do we excuse the behaviors of sufferers of personality disorders that make people more likely to commit violent crime. One should not understand the analogies Ive just made to be comparing homosexuality to pedophilia or murder in terms of its moral permissibility. The analogies are only meant to show that predisposal to behave a certain way is not reason in and of itself to justify the action.

Another weakness of the gay-by-nature argument is the dubious nature of its antecedent clause. Though Im inclined to believe the testimonial (e.g. most gay and lesbians say they feel drawn to the behavior independent of their volition) an correlational evidence (i.e. certain things do seem to be correlated with being gay, like having many older male siblings) available which suggest homosexuality is not a choice, by no means is any of that evidence conclusive. Perhaps the best evidence that homosexuality isnt a choice is the prevalence of same-sex sex across many other species. Even still, one can reject/challenge the clause "gays and lesbians cant help but be gays and lesbians" without committing too great a philosophical faux pas.

Furthermore, the gay-by-nature argument ignores what I take to be an integral part of the human experience: agency. If we are the kinds of beings that can make decisions (this is a debatable clause), then predisposal does not necessitate aparticular course of action. This is where many conservatives make the distinction between sexual mentality (what you desire to do) and sexual behavior (the actions you actually engage in). That said, when an opponent of gay rights posits a thesis that suggests that enabling gays and lesbians to freely express is somehow detrimental to society and there is a lower social cost in coercing a different behavior, their stance demands consideration if they only need defeat the claim that being gay is not a choice.

Lastly, the biggest problem with the gay-by-nature argument is it theoretically restricts the liberty gays and lesbians are fighting for to those supposedly born that way. In this way, the gay-by-nature argument has a built in hypocrisy. It advocates for those with certain natural inclinations while overlooking people who just happen to choose to behave in that fashion. Obviously this is a theoretical problem, but a problem no less. After all, the base motivation for all liberal advocacy is enabling everyone to have a reasonable opportunity at self-actualization.

A much better approach to advocating gay and lesbian rights is to rely on an argument anchored by rights, grounded in liberty (in fact, this is the exact approach used by Justice Anthony Kennedy in the most important gay rights cases of our time, i.e. Lawrence v. Texas and Windsor v. United States). Our Constitution promises each individual essential freedoms (speech, association, due process, and equal protection of the laws being the most pertinent) to direct their lives as they choose; independent of whether or not they are predisposed to do so. One of the only recognized limitations on these rights is when the exercise of the right in questions leads to the harm of another individual or inhibits anothersability to exercise the same right (Im looking at you, ruling in Citizens).

The reason why we need to relinquish our animus-fueled, disgusting vendetta against gays and lesbians is because when we use the law to inhibit their expression, we are disrespecting their autonomy and fettering their opportunity at self-actualization - the exact thing our country is meant to promote; this holds true independent of whether or not it is a choice to be gay. Actually, this argument is most compelling when we understand homosexuality as a choice. Unless homosexuality is detrimental to our society, and Ill readily dismantle all arguments that would dare hold that it is, gays and lesbians must be afforded the rights they are promised as citizens and as humans.

P.S. The evidence does seem to suggest that being gay or lesbian is a predisposition. But, as I hope this post shows, when it comes to gay rights, it doesnt really matter.
