Title: The Presumption Of Good Faith
Date: 2015/12/17
Category: Political Philosophy

With the polarization of our society has also come a persistent skepticism of the motives and values of the people with whom we disagree. On both sides there is a demonization of the intentions of those “others” and a concentrated campaign aimed at finding where our differences lie instead of using our similarities to create bridges to discuss our differences. The left screams racist, the right screams racebaiter; the left screams sexist, the right screams misandrist; both scream enemy.

I would never contend that the disagreements between us are insignificant; nor do I hope to argue that there aren’t truly evil people among us who do indeed subscribe to bigoted philosophies. I do, however, believe much of the friction that exists in this country is the direct product of an unwillingness on both sides to actually listen to what the other side is saying (this made all the easier by garbage news entities like Fox News and The Huffington Post). On one side there are people entrenched in their ways, completely shut off to the idea that their antiquated ideas of fairness contributed to an inequitable society that privileges some and directly disadvantages others. On the other side there are people fed up with the aforementioned society, who as a result near indiscriminately label everything bad and refuse to acknowledge that some things aren’t broken and some progress has been made.

This is, of course, a simplification. There are varying degrees of nuance, and outright exceptions. But my point is, independent of where one falls on the spectrum or how strongly one is convinced that things would be better if the other side would just be different, the standstill we currently find ourselves at cannot be overcome until we resume conversing *with* one another. I place a special emphasis on with because my experience, the testimony of my peers, and the things I read all near uniformly suggests that no one feels heard. Most think they are screaming at the top of their lungs expressing what should be common sense to all and yet no one seems to be acknowledging their concerns - the world remains equally as racist, equally as likely to condemn one as such; equally sexist, equally as likely to condemn one as such, and, over all, filled with contempt.

I believe this is exactly the kind of environment wherein a monster like Donald Trump thrives. By speaking almost entirely in vagaries that can apply to almost anything and giving a voice to the contempt many people feel for a society they believe no longer cares about their opinion, Donald Trump has managed to monopoilize the support of some of America’s angriest people. But it doesn’t have to be this way.

Which leads to the obvious question: how did it get like this and what can we do about it?

I believe both sides are to blame and both sides have an equal role in fixing this situation.

On the right, many people have refused to accept the pluralism of our society. In the past, and in many material ways in the present, white men have dominated every aspect of society and were only left to disagree about by what standard they would divide resources amongst themselves. Historically, the notion of conservatism was inseparable from the idea of conserving the purity of the public sector: no blacks, no women, no gays, no immigrants. So long as all accepted this, there was no problem too big that honest debate could not solve. But as women’s rights, civil rights, and gay rights movements, fortunately, dared to challenge such a system, other non-white male segments began to be represented in the civil discourse of our nation. By some, this was seen as an unwelcomed invasion; by others, an unexpected surprise that could possibly be a good thing but also bore the potential for chaos.

It was in this context that many people found themselves more steadfastly clinging to the values of the past than they had ever before. They insisted on their right to be racist and sexist (where they should have been arguing for their right to be able to make mistakes without immediately facing contempt). They were unwilling to recognize that the increased interactions between themselves and segments of our society they had previously ignored or ordained themselves worthy to speak for might mean a change in business as usual. They couldn’t see how most of society’s institutions, including the mechanism by which we chose what people would make the rules and distribute the resources were put in place with no regard for minorities and women. All they knew is that society worked the way it was, but they never stopped to ask for whom it was working.

On the left, many people have become paranoid and hypersensitive. Aware that our country’s history is comprised of perpetual injustices aimed at the same groups, and equally concerned by the way the current setup of our society threatened to continue that awful status quo, many individuals began to understand their only hope to be demonizing society at large, aiming specific animosity at any person or group who would dare defend any segment of it; dogmatically arguing that any and all change would be a good thing. As progress was made, this attitude, that our society was broken, did not subside. Soon the goal became to get rid of all discomfort faced by anyone. This kind of unilateral cushion-activism equally fails to recognize the plurality in our society; it was blind to the fact that very often rights conflict. The solution can never be to sacrifice the rights of either of the conflicting parties, lest we do away with the idea of rights altogether.

It is in this context that many people found themselves actively looking for injustice where perhaps none existed. They insisted everyone adopt their perspective of the world (where they should have been demanding that people be more tolerant of difference). To those who would not, they alternatively asked that their perspectives be banished. The art of convincing was no longer appealing, with many opting instead to only complain, with some not even interested in evaluating whether their complaint was even grounded in empirical evidence or good logic. At first this wasn’t that problematic because things really were that bad. But as society continues to become more equitable, a policy of unreasoned social criticism will only stand to threaten that equity.

And that’s how we got here: the right, seemingly opposed to accepting anymore change, the left convinced any difference is good difference.

As for how we fix this: I suggest we revive the presumption of good faith. 

When someone you disagree with suggests that a policy or social norm might be unfairly disadvantaging a certain group (especially if this country has a legacy of disadvantaging that group) it is your duty as a citizen of this nation to assume they are making this suggestion from a place of concern for social equality. You needn’t immediately agree, but you should at least be open to the possibility that your intuition that something is not racist or sexist does not conclude the matter. Engage in debate and express your views as best you can. Neither of you may be convinced at the conclusion of conversation, but in these circumstances you can at least be sure that neither of you has the sole objective of attacking the other’s ideas and sense of self. In this environment, there is no need to be hostile. 

When someone you disagree with suggests that a proposed reform might actually be unfair to certain members of our society and the segment in question does not have a history of being abused in this country, you should refrain from dismissing their concern on those grounds alone. Some of the time, they will have a point and some of the time their position will be a manifestation of unconscious biases. In either situation you’ll be better equipped to actually combat injustice, which I do believe is the whole point. This goes doubly for disqualifying perspectives simply because they don’t belong to the group you’d prefer they emanated from. In a world where even the subtlest forms of oppression have empirical manifestations, there is no need for a qualification that one live it before criticizing, assuming that criticism is done as a good faith effort to actually improve our society. Instead, if you believe the criticism is wrong, find the contradiction between one suggesting the criticism and one simultaneously being not racist or sexist and bring that potential contradiction to the attention of the criticizers. That is, after all, the exact strategy employed in this blog!

Lastly, seek out those who disagree with you. Don't hide in safe spaces or call for the silence of opposing speech. Neither side has the whole truth, nor can either side represent everyone’s interest fairly. If we don't listen to each other, all we have left is the most extreme versions of the other sides arguments, the incomplete portions that slip through the cracks, and the caricatures we create ourselves. Under those circumstances everything would obviously seem to be super racist or extremely radical. When we only interact to call the other sides names or see who can yell the loudest, we lose important opportunities to reevaluate and strengthen our own beliefs and forfeit any chance to have a meeting of the minds. 

P.S. When one encounters the truly evil segments of our society, a presumption of good faith will be easily overcome. The truly malicious racists and sexists amongst us, like Trump, do not go to any lengths to hide it, and thus we can identify them quickly even if we start from a position of assuming most people mean well.
