Title: A Good Person With A Gun
Date: 2015/12/03
Category: Gun Control

“The only thing that stops a bad guy with a gun, is a good guy with a gun.” These famous words uttered by Wayne La Pierre, the Executive Vice President of the National Rifles Association, have had a profound impact on the national gun control debate. The idea expressed by La Pierre seems to rely on the assumption that there is nothing we can do to keep bad persons from getting guns, so instead of focusing on gun control, our true goal should be to arm the good persons so they can shoot and kill the bad persons before the bad persons shoot and kill innocent people. Doesn’t sound that crazy, right?

Consider, after all, that there are in excess of 300 millions guns in private hands in the United States. This number is only going up, as every mass shootings scares good a portion of the public into arming themselves further. Since mass shootings in America in 2015 outpace days in 2015 (355 to 336 according to the Washington Post), there has been ample scare fueling ample gun purchases.

But the more I look at the evidence and think about all the rhetoric surrounding gun control, the more I see that La Pierre, the NRA, and much of the pro-gun lobby is either delusional or doesn’t actually care about reducing gun violence.

For starters, according to the Violence Policy Center, the most mass shootings occur in states in which there is high gun ownership and relaxed gun laws. Alaska, for example, leads the nation in gun homicides (19.59 per 100,000 residents) and is third in rate of gun ownership (60.6% of households). The three states on the opposite end of the spectrum, Hawaii, New York, and Massachusetts, all have strong gun control laws and relatively lower rates of gun ownership. Seems the best way to avoid shooting deaths is not to give guns to good persons, but instead to just have less guns.

In the international context, according to Vox, America dominates the field with firearm deaths per 1 million people with 29.7. Second place belongs to Switzerland with a comparatively small 7.7 deaths by firearm per 1 million people. Interestingly, America owns about 42% of the World’s privately owned guns despite being roughly 4% of the World’s population. It would seem the good persons are armed, so why do mass shootings keep happening?

Examining the philosophical underpinnings of Mr. La Pierre’s platitude reveals some interesting things.

If arming the good persons is indeed the solution, my first question would be, how do we find the good persons? We clearly have failed to identify them thus far. Some might start by suggesting more cops. I won’t go on at length about this here, but whether or not a badge is enough to indicate a good person is a somewhat contested issue. Of course most cops are good, but some cops are bad. If we can’t narrow our armament strategy in a way that would put the guns only in the hands of the good persons, we risk generating a weird feedback loop whereby, in the process of arming good persons, we arm bad persons, increasing the need for armed good persons resulting in an increase in armament efforts, with more good persons and bad persons getting guns and the only real change being the net amount of guns. One might suggest it is this exact feedback loop we are caught in now.

But let’s assume we can identify the good persons and only arm them. Great, but I have a new concern...I don’t know anyone who’s good all the time and I know plenty of formerly good persons who are now not so good. Once we give these guns to these good persons, how do we get the guns back if we discover we’ve chosen poorly? Do we arm different good persons? How many times have we heard the narrative that the most recent mass shooter was a kind soul who never hurt anyone in the past? The point is, being good or bad is a temporary personality trait subject to time and social conventions (I guess unless you’re Jesus Christ or Will Smith). Gun possession, on the other hand, can be a much more lasting predicament.

But let’s assume we get so good at identifying the good persons that we only ever arm the right good persons who remain good the entire time; what happens when those good persons make a mistake? One of the most daunting sayings I’ve ever heard in my life is “bullets don’t have names on them.” Though some prime advertising might make this untrue someday, the spirit of the expressions, that a shooter’s intention isn’t the sole determinant of the consequence of firing a gun, is still an important thing to keep in mind. It is inevitable that a good person, in the process of shooting bad persons, will occasionally shoot some innocents. I wonder how many accidental good person shootings we’re willing to tolerate?

But let’s assume the perfectly identified good persons who will remain good their entire lives will never make mistakes. I wonder in that case if the good person has to have the gun on them at all times. Or, is this good person allowed to sleep. If yes, what do we do with all the good persons’ guns when they’re sleeping? No one can be perpetually armed. According to Slate, 100 children die every year from unintentional shootings and another 2900 are shot unintentionally, often as a result of poor storage of guns not currently in use by their good person owners.

But let’s assume our perfectly-identified, perpetually good person who makes no mistake is also very good at storing his guns in a way that it is not easily accessible. When emergencies strike, seems it’s going to take that person sometime to get to that gun now. The rate of gun fire for most guns is pretty fast. Seems the bad person will have a bit of a time cushion before the good person springs into action. In this cushion I imagine the bad person will probably kill people, the exact result we had hoped to avoid.

But let’s assume the good person we identified who is unwaveringly good, never errs, and stores his guns responsibly, also gets to their guns quickly enough to confront a bad person immediately. The thing is, this good person isn’t bulletproof. The recent Planned Parenthood shooting saw the unfortunate murder of three cops at the hands of a bad person with a gun. So even when good persons have guns, the bad persons still also have guns.

I understand that for many people, guns represent important cultural instruments. Hunting, Sport, and just general love of guns motivate many people to oppose gun control for fear of losing their livelihood. But, people are losing their lives. There simply must be solutions that are more nuanced than “more guns.” That isn’t working.

From what the evidence suggests both internally and internationally, where there are less guns there are less shootings. Why should we continue to ignore the evidence? Let’s generate more barriers between guns and people (e.g. background checks, waiting periods, etc). Some of you may worry that this kind of disarmament will give the government too much power. But here’s the thing:

###THE GOVERNMENT HAS FUCKING NUCLEAR WEAPONS

There is no weapon you’re going to ever own that will compare. But even without the nukes, there are drones, high grade assault weapons, and many, many, many other kinds of destructive technology that give the government a rather significant advantage.

And…

We already have 300 million guns. If that isn’t going to protect us, what will? Simply put: no one ever intends for bad people to get guns. But bad people get guns because there are just so many of them; it’s kind of hard to keep track. We should be attempting to limit guns to good persons and also trying to get rid of the very powerful guns that might be problematic if they end up in the wrong hands (I’m looking at you assault rifles). Come on America, this situation, unlike racism, sexism, and the other things that I write about, has a pretty obvious solution. We can’t keep valuing our “way of life” over the lives of others. That’s not a society.

P.S. I recognize there are other solutions like increased mental health funding that might be effective. The point of this post is simply to reveal the insanity behind one of the most touted positions in the entire gun debate.
