Title: Is Ignorance Bliss?
Category: Social Justice
Date: 2015/09/17

It is well documented that those who take it upon themselves to become conscious of and combat social injustices far and wide routinely feel sadness and exhaustion. I wrote last about how this might lead to lapses in enthusiasm and effort. But, a comment by a friend made me wonder if the age old truism, ignorance is bliss, is actually true. Is it really the case that looking the other way is more comfortable. I’ve already explained in several posts why apathy is a morally bankrupt position incompatible with respect for human dignity, but now I wonder: is it more pleasurable.

Intuitively, the answer seems to be yes. There’s is a necessarily painful undertaking involved in truly committing to the social justice fight. One is constantly bombarded with negative imagery, obvious instances of injustice, and the pain caused by the indifference of others. The prevalence of all these things is greatly increased the more one invests in the social justice fight. As more discreet mechanisms of oppression become easy to understand, they also become easier to identify and thus more likely to cause discomfort. One who foregoes this vicious cycle of enlightenment and disappoint, would seem to also avoid the pain I’ve just described.

But, as is often the case, intuition is not that reliable. Plato’s *Republic*, though forwarding a terrible idea for how one should orchestrate a society, tackles a similar inquiry. Plato inquires about the life of perfect injustice and wonders if it is really preferable to a just life. Though I would not contend that a life of apathy toward social justice issues is a life of perfect injustice, the parallels between Plato’s inquiry and the one set out here are obvious. The one difference being the question at hand is a matter of knowledge and not action.

**So, simply put: With respect to social justice issues, is it better to know, or is it better to be blissfully ignorant?**

This question can be tackled on two planes: the subjective and the objective. Because I think the objective plane is the easier to argue for, I’ll deal with that briefly.

From a human dignity/justice standpoint, one who refuses to acknowledge, investigate, and combat the systemic injustices that some groups deal with daily is, perhaps indirectly (but I dare say directly as well since I believe many of these systems feed on the indifference of privileged individuals; indifference itself being a privilege), contributing to those struggles. When we choose to overlook the perpetual plight of historically disadvantaged groups, we also choose to let those plights continue. It is no excuse that one person may not be able to create the critical mass to turn the tide: (1) because that’s not true; history is full of galvanizing individuals who greatly changed history through their actions; and (2) critical masses are comprised of individuals (a fact routinely overlooked by the “I’m just one person” crowd). Despite the nonsense spouted by some libertarians, in a society, our legacies are conjoined and the habitual suffering of some segments of society is a culpable offense on the other segments. All things considered, it is objectively untenable to be ignorant. There is no bliss.

On the subjective frontier, I think the truth is best illustrated by limiting the inquiry to a person belonging to an oppressed group. Independent of which oppressed group one belongs to, denial of the social oppression of that group, or even the much less intentional but still pitiable position of pure ignorance of that oppression, cannot be blissful. The reason why is very similar to why Plato believes the life of perfect injustice would be torturous. According to Plato, to lead a life of perfect injustice one would also have to have a distorted internal balance. One would be dominated by their base desires and have no control over their impulses and emotions. This person would be compelled in all directions and have no say in their ultimate course of action.This person cannot be said to be fully enjoying their autonomy and thus they are not living the fullest experience they could be.

In the same vein, to lead a life of ignorance while belonging to an oppressed group would have its own near contradictory setbacks. For one, this hypothetical individual would be constantly forced to find explanations to the countless instances of oppression they encountered that they were unable to acknowledge as such. This person would find contempt for themselves when they feel racism’s clutches. They would understand that external pressure as an internally produced hallucination. They would be cursed to a life of diligent hard work met with disproportionately poor returns. They would be robbed of the full value of their efforts with no explanation. To be ignorant of the overarching structures of oppression and subjugation being refreshed and expanded daily means taking personal responsibility for the consequences of those structures. It may even mean, to a minor or potentially great degree, admitting an inherent deficiency in one’s abilities. Ignorance of oppression is constant false knowledge of inadequacy; of both self and community. How could that ever be preferable to understanding how society works and being equipped to foster change? It should be apparent that the life of ignorance comes with its own set of frustrations and episodes of powerlessness. The only difference is there is no hope in this stance because there can be no perception of a reasonable opportunity for change.

P.S. as the consciousness of this country continues to improve, our laws will continue to reflect more open, equal principles. Those who are ignorant cannot enjoy this progress.

