Title: Is It Actually Funny?
Category: Social Justice
Date: 2015/05/21

We have all at one time or another found ourselves somewhat annoyed with seems like the excessive policing of speech. The greatest bother  might be when we are telling jokes at the expense of a marginalized or plagued group. In these instances, we are likely to view what we are saying as asinine, fun speech. And yet, people are quick to chastise us for the remarks. From rape jokes to comments that appear to reinforce prejudice to sly remarks about tragedies, it’s important to discuss whether or not we’re doing anything wrong. Even if people laugh, is it actually funny? And, if it is funny, is it okay to make the joke?

The obvious and most frequently promulgated argument for why we need be careful with our humor holds that when we joke about rape or minorities or tragedies, we actually contribute to the demeaned predicament of the injured parties because we make it easier to take their situation lightly. This indirect mitigation, the argument continues, leads to higher incidences of the bad thing (e.g. rape) or less compassion toward the suffering entities. Thus with the joke, one is supplementing the initial injustice with another injustice; literally adding insult to injury.

This argument has some intuitive truth to it. Jokes are meant to make us takes things less seriously. It’s why there is usually a funny scene following a murder in a movie. Comic relief is a real thing, and it could potentially have a diminishing effect on how much compassion we feel when we perceive the tragedies that happen to others. And if we are less compassionate, we certainly will be also less likely to help combat the injustice. Furthermore, there is the potential to reinforce the negative thoughts surrounding the group in question. A joke that paints a black individual as dangerous, for example may run the risk of reinforcing that misguided stereotype and thus may actually contribute to the oppression and further marginalization of black people. These are startling consequences.

But, they are not necessarily the consequences of every joke. There is no empirical evidence to suggest that jokes make people care less, and thus it is worthwhile to hypothesize other consequences that jokes based on taboo premises may have. Potentially, for example, rape jokes and jokes that appear to be at the expense of the disadvantage could be helpful to combating the aforementioned woes. Rape, poverty, racism, the aftermath of natural disasters, untimely deaths, etc: these things are all hard to talk about. As a result, these social problems spend much time below the threshold of consciousness for many individuals not sharing in those struggles. Perhaps when we joke about those things, we actually force people to momentarily consider those terrible things, delivering difficult subject matter in a digestible form that doesn’t cause one to immediately exit the space in which the topic is being broached. Even jokes that cater to our negative stereotypes may force us to actually confront those biases we have that we otherwise don’t acknowledge (one would need to have some familiarity with the stereotype to get the joke). In this mold, “bad” jokes appear to actually be quite useful and maybe even necessary for discourse and change. Even the worst of those kinds of jokes could serve an important function.

There is, however, a more principled argument that good consequence cannot defeat. Supposed that you were to actually come upon a rape or a hate crime or a newly homeless person. Imagine you began to point and laugh. Not only that, but after awhile, you called other people over to join you in your laughter. The woman is struggled to kick off her attacker, the assailant is pummeling the individual because of their skin color or sexual orientation, the newly homeless individual is attempting to gather their things - all this is going on and meanwhile you are just laughing. If, after a while, you stop laughing and stop the rapist, scare off the attacker, or help the homeless person gather their things, did an injustice occur? It would seem so, and a particularly harsh one at that.

There is an expression in comedy, though, which seems to show why that example may not be an appropriate way to think about these jokes. It goes: tragedy plus time (or distance) equals comedy. There is a reason polio jokes aren’t a big point of contention. Polio is no longer a seeming ubiquitous social ill. Laughing at the fact that it once was seems to be a big of celebration at our society’s progress (though it is possible that we are just laughing at the suffering of those in the past). The idea here is that of course the above described situation is wrong. There is no joke in that situation, just a sick schadenfreude. 

For their to actually be a comedic attempt, the joke and the laughter it inspires can’t be proximate to the actual tragedy, both with respect to time and distance. Rape, racism, and other contemporary social ills, under this model, should not be jokes about because they are very proximate. On the other hand, while this rule is not set in stone, it does suggest that the person telling the joke is doing more than just laughing at suffering or suggesting others do so. The joke is meant to tackle the absurdity of the situations. It is, after all, absurd that people forcibly take sex from others. It is absurd that people allow stereotypes to dictate their interactions with entire groups of individuals. It is absurd that some people are so vulnerable that natural disasters literally ruin their entire nations. These things are all absurd, and the jokes may be meant to make us recognize that absurdity, whether or not it translates into action.

There are also the free speech concerns. Even if the speech does indelible harm, to what extent should we be able to stop it. I think this consideration is born of a poor understanding of what it means to have free speech as a social institution. Free speech doesn’t mean you can say whatever you want with no consequence. Free speech means that the government can’t limit or undercut your speech just because it finds it disagreeable. There is nothing inconsistent, on the other hand, between a society that embraces free speech and a society that ostracizes individuals who say things it finds disagreeable. Free speech is merely the promise that one will be afforded the opportunity to convince others to accept their ideas. If the ideas are inflammatory, boring, disagreeable, or incoherent, free speech does not dictate that society listen to it or that other individuals not use their speech to criticize the speech they don’t like. Even our Supreme Court jurisprudence recognizes that some categories of speech, fighting words, exists only to cause conflagrations of emotions and as such are not warranted speech protections (Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire, 315 U.S. 568 (1942)). My point, free speech isn’t meant to enable everyone to say anything. 

Ultimately the questions appears to be, what are we laughing at? Are we laughing at the rape, or are we laughing at the ridiculousness of rape as an entrenched social institution. If we are laughing at the rape and the victim of it, the that’s wrong. It makes a mockery of a very serious problem. But, if we are laughing at the practice of rape, the actual acts and the individuals who undertake them, then it seems the joke is more acceptable, even if not the most efficient or appropriate way of criticizing deplorable social phenomenon. This logic further extends to jokes that seem to reinforce prejudice. If the joke is funny because it highlights negative stereotypes and reveals their absurdity than that seems like a good thing. But, the joke merely serves to reinforce that kind of thinking and is funny in light of doing so, then it would appear we would be much better off without that kind of humor. 

What informs this calculation the most might be the intention of the joke teller and the construction of the joke. The former might be impossible to know, but the latter is easily identifiable. If the jokes subject is a member of a victimized group and the jokes format is such that the suffering if put front and center and their seems to be no critique or commentary beyond “hey look how funny this is, especially since it’s not happening to you” then one can deduce the joke is likely of the bad variety. As unsatisfying as this might be to admit, it really does depend on a lot of different factors as to whether or not a rape joke or anything similar kind of joke is funny.

P.S. Before you tell a joke (or after), I think it is worthwhile to consider who your audience is and who is likely to laugh at what you’re laughing. If your joke caters to misogynist and white supremacists, maybe it is indeed a bad joke that you shouldn’t make.


