Title: Justice For The Oppressor 
Category: Social Justice 
Date: 2015/10/08

There is an implicit argument that can be derived from two of my posts: "What Are White Men Owed?" and "Oppression Is Not Subjective". I'd like to explicitly make that argument here. 

My social justice advocacy is inspired, as I explained in the HDE series, by a desire to maximize human dignity in our society. While that goal obviously requires the dismantling of oppressive social mechanisms and purging of the attitudes that reinforce those mechanisms, it seems that it also requires justice for the oppressor. This isn't that radical an idea when justice is understood as persons receiving what they deserve. Through this schema, justice for the oppressor would mean stripping them of all the privileges and benefits our society affords them that have not been earned, with an intense focus on those privileges and benefits that keep other segments of our society from getting their fair share. 

But, justice for the oppressor also necessitates utilizing means and pursuing ends that don't inflict unnecessary pain on the oppressor or diminish their ability to lead meaningful lives too greatly. I think this is an often overlooked piece of the social justice fight and also a motivating factor for some of the social justice fights most ardent opponents.

I hold this view for two reasons: most oppressors are doing so unwittingly (maybe even, for some, unwillingly) and as a result ignoring these considerations will surely create new injustices, even if that's  hard to imagine given the power dynamics currently dictating our society. I don't mean to say there are no bad people actively enjoying the benefits of intersectional oppression. I merely mean to suggest that the solution to oppression is not a new class of oppressors; which I think is a probable outcome of any advocacy that is unconcerned with justice for both sides.

Given these concerns, it becomes more obvious why oppression must be defined in strictly objective terms. A subjective understanding of oppression blurs the lines between what is uncomfortable and what is unfair. Every instance in which a black person feels sad, a women feels harassed, or a gay person feels discriminated against does not coincide with an episode of oppression. Now, I recognize and agree that the superstructure of our society makes oppression near inescapable. I do, however, believe that the manifestation of that superstructure in the exchanges between people belonging to differently empowered classes is not ubiquitous. If we allow ourselves to be sentimentally swayed into combating every instance of uncomfortability, we undercut ourselves on the frontiers where we are fighting actual injustices. Moreover, when we give way to subjective definitions of oppression (definitions that rely exclusively on the testimony of the oppressed) we risk chastising and reprimanding morally permissible behavior, which I believe is an injustice. 

For those who may be skeptical of the concerns I've expressed here, consider this. Much of what we call Oppression results from the unintended consequences of certain portions of our society hoping to forward their own interests. Why would it be impossible that in forwarding the race agenda or the feminist agenda or the gay rights agenda that advocates overstep? Is it unimaginable that humans looking to correct human error might commit errors of their own?

Lastly, I think the contention I'm making here is that we should make room in the justice calculus for the oppressors interests. I know it seems repugnant, but if we do not truly care about justice for all, how can we expect others to?

P.S. I recognize that this post could be read as an elongated version of the hashtage alllivesmatter. And I'm okay with that. My problem with the all lives matter mantra is that it has situated itself against the black lives matter movement in an attempt to confuse the point of that movement. This post, on the other hand, acknowledges oppression, hopes for its eradication, and warns against its duplication.
