Title: All Quiet on the LGBTQ Front
Category: LGBTQ Rights
Date: 2015/08/06

Boy is it easy to be pacified. The fight for social justice is taxing, and every victory is hard fought. Every step, small or large, in the right direction is certainly a cause for celebration. But never mistake a stride toward the summit, no matter how big, as evidence the mountain has been conquered. 

I say this because I’ve noticed a sharp decline in gay rights advocacy since the *Obergefell* decision, both in my immediate communities but also in news outlets and other forms of media. Gays can marry now. That’s great. Equality, however, has not been achieved. LGBTQ individuals still face discrimination in many areas of our society and a Supreme Court decision remedying one evil faced by that population is not cause for relenting.

And, unfortunately, these are not mild abuses faced by queer folk. In most states in this country there is no non-discrimination legislation in place. As a result, ignorance and animus reign. Unenlightened individuals are able to deny gays housing and financing for housing, fire them for being gay, deny them service to public accommodations, and let us not forget about the hate speech LGBTQ individuals have likely become calloused to because it is such a frequent part of their reality (though we’re improving in this area significantly).

The problem is, we have yet to reconcile our laws with our consciences. Though many empowered individuals now realize (or at least claim to realize) the importance of an accepting society for some previously labeled taboo lifestyles, the statute books have not been updated to reflect that. Most antidiscrimination legislation only deals with race, gender, religion and age. Sexuality, a common cause of discrimination, has not yet, in most states, and federally, been included in this group. And it needs to be. Imagine the insanity of marrying the love of your life, an individual of the same sex, and shortly thereafter losing your job because your boss found out you were gay. Now add to that the unfortunate truth that for many individuals, there is no legal recourse. That is not equality.

Some opponents of advancing equality argue that we shouldn’t and constitutionally we’re not allowed to used the public force to make private individuals adopt our values. These people cite the 1st Amendment Freedom of Speech Clause and Free Exercise Clause and the 5th and 14th Amendment Due Process Clauses as examples that our founding fathers hoped to protect one’s liberty to believe as they want and to act on those beliefs within reason, only interrupted by the formal procedures of government intrusion due all individuals. And there is certainly some truth in this stance. But the 14th Amendment Equal Protection Clause is pretty clear on our obligation to make our society safe for all individuals. Having insecurity in housing, employment, and services is not safe. As for the formal processes, state legislatures and Congress voting to protect LGBTQ individuals does seem like due process, and thus no liberties are subverted, assuming of course that the protection offered does not impinge too greatly on the right to participate in commerce. What constitutes too great an impingement is for the Executive and Judicial branches to decide.

Moreover, our society’s failings grant to LGBTQ individuals with full dignity is not exclusive to our formal institutions and public accommodations. Socially, we have not reached an adequate level of acceptance; and that is true even of some individuals who harbor no animosity toward the LGBTQ community. 

How so?

Well, people still need to “come out.” We still need to be warned or alerted or informed of their sexuality. To me, this remains one of the great blemishes on even the most progressive rhetoric surrounding the LGBTQ community. Perhaps a gay or lesbian individual may understand this differently, but it seems that coming out is a mechanism of differentiation. Not that I feel gays and lesbians should hide who they are; much the opposite I think they should embrace it fully. But I hope for a society where one’s sexuality is not a talking point unless the conversation is about sexuality. The prevalence of homosexuality in our society (and throughout a significant portion of the animal kingdom) is far too high for us to continue to be surprised, or impressed, or at all molested by the fact that gays live among us.

P.S. Though this post speaks specifically to LGBTQ issues, consider this a uniform stance on all social justice fronts. A minor victory in any area or a major victory on any frontier is no excuse to ever give up. Overthrowing the intersectional oppression of many segments of our society is the only goal. Any victory is a move toward that goal.


