Title: A Letter to Liberals
Date: 2014/12/24
Category: Political Philosophy
Being a liberal puts a unique burden on a person to be particularly excellent when conveying ideas, exceptionally persistent in promoting those ideas, and painfully patient in waiting for change (not passive but just near immune to frustration).

Why?

Liberals challenge the status quo. We see society as it is and ask if it can be better. We refuse to accept the tired excuse: "things have always been this way" and ask if things should be different - in part because we know few things have always been any particular way. We take humanity seriously: ALL OF HUMANITY. 

But the thing is, the status quo in any arena is so damn comfortable, and very often changing it requires getting people to buy into a vision they may not support; a future they may not want. Sometimes change mandates sacrificing long enjoyed luxuries and privileges so that some stranger whom one will never meet can live a better life.  

That's a hard sell.

And it's an even harder sell if we get lost in dogma; if we allow ourselves to get caught up in catchphrases (e.g. victim-blaming, respectability politics, etc.) without explaining the significance and relevance of those concepts; if we resort to name-calling instead of argumentation. Don't call them racists, show them their racism. Don't call them sexists, show them their sexism. Don't call them idiots, show them the fallacies they rely on. After all, a central tenet of liberal social commentary is that there are complicated and insidious mechanisms at work (e.g. racism is now a matter of how our social institutions function, marginalizing and oppressing groups of people in a way predictable by skin color and historical position, and not simply limited to animus and blatant discrimination). To me that suggests that an understanding of these mechanisms is not readily accessible to all people. We cannot immediately develop contempt for those who are ignorant. 

As a liberal, you are also responsible for truly understanding the motivations of a conservative. One might want to assert that conservatives have the same responsibility, but I don't think so, primarily because most conservatives support doing nothing (i.e. keeping society relatively consistent in its workings) and to do that they dont need a very good arsenal.

There are two kinds of conservatives. There are subsets of these kinds, but two primary camps. The first kind of conservative is thoroughly cynical. They have a bleak understanding of human nature. They also majoritarily subscribe to a kind of pragmatism. Essentially, they believe that society currently may not be perfect, but it is functional, reasonable, and stable. Change and reform threaten that stability. These conservatives worry pursuing the greater good may undermine the working society we have now, potentially resulting in chaos. To convince this kind of conservative of the necessity or utility of any reform requires showing the conservative that the aspect of the World we look to change is currently not functional, reasonable, or stable or that the reform we hope to implement would ONLY improve the functionality, reasonableness, or stability of that aspect of society, or both. Sometimes change requires simply putting their fears to rest (e.g. letting gays marry won't lead to a proliferation in beastiality).

The second kind of conservative is dogmatic. This conservative may not believe society is perfect but she assumes that some force (e.g. God, the Market, etc.) will ultimately yield the best result or provide the best reference for action. Persuading this kind of conservative of anything is particularly hard since their approach to politics is admittedly not logical. To convince this kind of conservative of anything you have to show them that the potential social and legal changes you endorse are not inconsistent with their beliefs or show them the force they believe will do everything has so far not done a great job of handling things. Engaging the validity of the force they believe in is often an immediate conversation ender so try to focus on the consequences of their belief and not the substance (e.g. God doesn't want that isnt a reliable way to dictate our behavior so perhaps we shouldn't make it the litmus test for a woman's reproductive choices v.s. God is not real, go fuck yourself: one approach is a lot more conducive to progress than the other).

It might even be helpful to think of conservatives on a spectrum or graph that plots dogmatism and cynicality. 

Liberals also need to keep each other honest. Just because a reform or a change or a critique claims to service some discrete and insular entity does not grant it immunity from scrutiny. Weeding out the dogma is important for liberals. All our positions need to be coherent and tenable. Any misstep provides justification in the minds of skeptics for them to dismiss our entire platform. For that reason we must be thorough in our criticism of ourselves and willing to push each other toward perfection. 

I find that liberals quickly retreat into pathological argumentation, asserting how nice or kind or good something would be. But conservative pathology isn't responsive to that. More importantly, emotional reasoning is often biased, flawed, and unreliable. We need to rely almost entirely on empirical reasoning and logical deduction even when fueled by sentimental concerns. 

Lastly, liberality requires that one never fall in love with any means for achieving a goal. Becoming enamored with any one outcome or approach is dangerous. The primary goal of Liberal thought is to create a fair, inclusive society which enables every individual to have a realistic opportunity to achieve self-actualization. Pledging allegiance to any particular instrument of achieving that goal at the expense of the goal itself moves you from the category of liberal to fanatic. If that is your prerogative, please pursue it to your heart's content. Just don't do it under the banner of liberal; even if you resemble one. 

I yearn for a time when liberals will be taken seriously again. That day will only come if we stop whining and start taking ourselves seriously. That starts with recommitting ourselves to argumentation. 

Side note: I do think conservatives serve an important role in society. Where liberals push the boundaries, conservatives keep us safe from ourselves. The human imagination is incredible. But it is also fleeting and unreliable. If we ran with all of its crazy inventions we might indeed find ourselves in a chaotic situation. For that reason, we need practicality. Many wise conservatives provide exactly that. Democracy, after all, is a balancing act.
