Title: Women’s Bodies and Men’s Bodies
Category: Feminism
Date: 2015/06/04

People still struggle to understand why our society’s beauty standards for women and their bodies are unfair. There are two main camps of skeptics: there are those who deny we mistreat women through our appraisal of their bodies; and there are those who suggest that our society is equally harsh to men. Both positions are misguided, but the latter position does have a nugget of truth in it.

As for whether or not our tacit disapproval of most body types affects women negatively, we needn’t guess. Numerous studies have revealed that many women suffer from psychological conditions and heighten distress directly related to their perceptions of their bodies. A 2008 CDC study found that women are twice as likely as men to suffer from an eating disorder. A National Institute  of Biotechnology Information study found that 44% of women 15 - 19 believed they were overweight despite being in a healthy weight range, and the National Eating Disorder Association has recorded an increase in the prevalence of eating disorders among this group every decade since 1930. Another study from the same organization published in 2013 found that roughly 21% of women partake in excessive body checking behaviors (looking in mirrors, weighing themselves, etc.), compared to under 10% of men. This data suggest women feel they are under some pressure to adhere to some standard of beauty that is not related to them being healthy, but instead asks for something more. On this scale, it not possible to dismiss this as just in the minds of some women.

This is where the second group of skeptics comes in. They argue that women are just more sensitive to external pressure. They suggest women toughen up; ignore the “pressure” and just be comfortable with their bodies. After all, they say, men face similar pressure to have a certain body type, yet they are able to shrug off the pressure. There are even some more sympathetic skeptics who suggest that the media mistreats men and women equally, and admit that we need to create more accepting spaces that allow for more diversity in body type, provided the body is still healthy (I won’t advocate self-harm, including purposeful malnutrition). While I do agree the media does also present an idealized, near impossible standard of beauty for men’s bodies (I know this firsthand), and our society does need to do a better job of creating an accepting environment for men and women of different shapes, sizes, colors, and proportions, I do think there is an injustice in not understanding and acknowledging that the pressure for women is greater than that for men.

Why?

Well, simply put, our sexist society understands women’s bodies as a much higher proportion of women’s overall worth than it does men’s bodies of men’s overall worth. If a man doesn’t fit the chiseled, tall, slightly muscular phenotype the media shoves down our throats, it’s okay. People will still inquire about our intellect, our sense of humor, our hobbies, and our other talents. For women, on the other hand, if they do not fit the skinny, long haired, big breasted, mildly curve, long-legged, strong cheekbones, etc, etc, etc, etc, etc, standard of beauty, they are quickly cast aside. We don’t take the next step to look at their minds, hearts, and passions. As a result, a woman who does not resemble the women on TV is afforded significantly less opportunity and respect from our society. This truth forces women to obsess over their bodies, constantly worried they are one cheeseburger away from being ignored. 

If we actually care about people, and especially women, having healthy body images, we have to reconsider how we evaluate women’s worths. Until we take women’s brains and other talents seriously, no parameters for beauty will be wide enough. Dove can make as many commercials with diversely shaped women it wants, but those efforts will be ineffective at combating the real problem. Our society needs to afford women the same respect it gives to men. Our message shouldn’t just be that their are many acceptable body types, which there are. That message needs to be supplemented by promoting the idea that women, and all people, are more than their physical appearance. This has implications about race as well, as you smart ones probably gathered.

P.S. I believe it is our failure to appreciate women’s full humanity which also partially contributes to incidences of sexual assaults, as perpetrators are unable to see beyond the body they want to have sex with to view the human they are harming. Reducing women’s humanities to their bodies and then hypersexualizing those bodies is an unacceptable model.


