Title: Bigots Can Be Nice People
Category: Social Justice
Date: 2015/05/29

Let's start by addressing what bigotry is. A lot of people immediately go to the ultra-restricted definition of bigotry which suggest that malice must be involved for something to be bigoted. That definition was functional in past eras because the law allowed every instance of racism, sexism and homophobia to also be accompanied by malice; prejudice and animous were near indistinguishable. But today's laws protect those lower on the social hierarchy from outright battery and persecution by those higher up (at least they are intended to). As a result, malice is no longer a predictable part of bigotry. This separation between ill will and bigoted sentiments is what has enabled racism, sexism, homophobia and other forms of bigotry to disguise themselves as other things—e.g. concern, fear, suspicion, indifference, adherence to market values, and other deceptive forms. When one removes the malice component from the definition of bigotry, you're left with something that resembles: bigotry is the conscious, latent, or tacit belief that a person's race, sex, sexual orientation, gender, etc. is a marker of deficiencies in character, ability, or intelligence that lead to the person being of less intrinsic value and, perhaps dangerous, untrustworthy, expendable, or unfitting of fair treatment and full dignity.

Unsurprinsingly, a lot of people resist this definition. For one, it increases the likelihood that they will be considered a bigot, and few people want to carry that title. Furthermore, acknowledging that bigotry may take other forms besides animosity makes bigotry harder to identify, and humans really do value simplicity. Unfortunately, it is the case most people have some trace of bigotry within them and racism, sexism, and homophobia aren’t simple things. No matter how much we may want to reduce the complexity of intersectional oppression, doing so only serves to allow that oppression to continue, and that is not a moral, reasonable, or dignified outcome.

The question remains, however, if bigotry isn’t just about blatant hate, how are we to identify it? Obviously, when bigotry does take the form of hate it is easily identifiable. When it does not, it can still be correctly identified. While my following suggestions may not be perfect indentifiers, they should reliably help one identify bigotry in themselves and in others. 

For starters, people reveal a lot about their underlying sentiments in the way they discuss groups they may not appraise highly. Anytime a persons language suggests that a negative predicament is justified by or the fault of something inherent to a group, that person likely harbors some bigoted sentiment toward that group. This may seem like a blanket statement, but it surely is accurate. Consider, for example, a person who suggests that gay marriage is an affront to real marriage. This person may further contend that they don’t mind gay relationships but just think the institution of marriage should be reserved for a man and a woman. This person doesn’t appear to hate gays so much as they want to protect an instution they hold dearly, perhaps because of religious commitments. The question is, what are they protecting it from? There dialogue suggests that gays would some how demean this thing in virtue of being gay. While this may not be a hateful position, it is certainly a bigoted one.
Another indicator of bigotry is the solution people think our are appropriate to social problems. Consider people who think law and order should be accomplished through increase surviellance of minority communities. They claim to only support these tactics because they decrease crime and only choose minorities communities because they commit the most crime. But, as Jeffrey Reiman explains in *The Rich Get Richer, The Poor Get Prison*, what constitutes crime is a construct of who has the power to say what people should and should not be allowed to do. Those who have often protect what they have and make it harder for individuals who do not have to get. Furthermore, policing is disproportionate such that crime rates become self-fulfilling prophecies as law enforcement looks for crime where they think crime will be, increasing the likelihood that they will find crime in those places. We know that many crimes (e.g drug use) are done with the same frequency across the races and yet only minorities face terrible penalties for undertaking the behavior. The point: understanding policing as a binary between criminals (minorities) and innocents (white people) is inherently racist, even if the advocate for these policies have black friends. And, lastly, we know that excessive policing is a far less effective solution than treatment and preventative investments in welfare and education. One who would forego these solutions in the name of law and order is being both foolish and bigoted, even if they advocate with a smile.

The last indicator I will provide is the hardest to use. This has to do with differential treatment. It is never identifiable in one instance, but instead focuses on trends. Ask yourself or ask of others, how they treat individuals of different races and sexes and sexual orientation. Look for patterns. Do you often dismiss female opinions? Do you get nervous when you encounter African Americans? Do you wince at the sight of gay intimacy? I find that all these things are or were true for me. Not because I’m a bad person, but because I am a bigot. I didn’t hate any of these groups, and yet I could feel that I thought of them differently than I did white men. 

The media, social interactions, friends and family; all these entities are constantly bombarding us with images and narratives which inspire in us unfortunate feelings about societies vulnerable groups. We are taught to hate them, blame them, distrust them. It isn’t that we want to feel this way. But, we do. And acknowledging that is the only way we can defeat these feelings and move past our bigotry. I am a sexist, I am a racist, I am a homophobe. But, I am less all these things than I once was because after admitting it, I could act to change it. I could force myself to confront those feelings and dismiss them as baseless. As a result I have overcome many of my former bigoted infirmities. You can do the same but first you have to overcome the idea that you can only be racist, sexist, homophobic or bigoted in some other way if you hate those groups. I was a homophobe when I wrote about the importance of allowing gays to marry, and I was a sexist when I first accepted the value of feminism. It didn’t make me a bad guy. I know many people who currently have unacknowledged biases who as a result are on the wrong side of the fight for social justice. I hope that recognizing their biases will help them change that.

P.S. Some of you racists, sexists, and homophobes are bad people and this post is not meant to make you more comfortable in your disgusting skin. This post is merely meant to suggest that being a bigot does not necessarily imply that one is hateful.
