Title: Oppression Is Not Subjective
Category: Social Justice
Date: 04/02/2015

There is an endorsed double standard among some social justice activists, commentators, and opponents. It is born of noble motives, but it is harmful to all frontiers of the social justice fight. The desire to both acknowledge the sentimental/experiential element of oppression and also identify oppression where that element is absent, forces some individuals seeking social equality to suggest oppression is and is not subjective.

This kind of thinking is evident when some use statements like “you don’t know what if feels like to be oppressed” to disqualify other perspectives.” The perspective being disqualified is usually a bad one that we would be better as a society if no one had, but the way to remove it from our society isn’t that statement. If the oppression of many segments of society is real and institutional, then there should be an overwhelming amount of statistical data to back this up (which there is). If that is so, then even if one can’t say what oppression feels like, one can still observed that oppression is occurring. This suggests to me that when someone is commenting on oppression, they cannot be assumed wrong immediately just because they do not belong to the oppressed group they are commenting on and thus haven’t experienced oppression. (If, however, the quoted response is construed to mean something like “if you had the requisite experience of oppression you would be more sympathetic to the group whose oppression you are ignoring” it does actually make a powerful point about the need for empathy. I do doubt that this is how it’s always used).

Consider a feminist suggests that catcalling is wrong because it makes women feel unsafe. A skeptic might counter by saying that in some cultures, catcalling is seen as flattering and otherwise asinine. The feminists, I believe rightly, hoping to still demonize the practice in that culture where women do not feel oppressed, might suggests that even when women are not made to feel oppressed or demeaned by catcalling it is still an oppressive phenomenon because it promotes in men an idea of entitlement to evaluate and comment on women’s bodies, further reinforcing an unequal power relationship between the sexes, apparent most notably in the amount of sexual violence perpetrated against women’s bodies.

It is hard to doubt that the feminist’s second characterization is a more powerful narrative of oppression. What I am suggesting here is that the feminist’s first characterization is, with respect to establishing that an act is oppressive, useless. I would hate to be misread as suggesting it doesn’t matter that, in some cases, catcalling makes women feel unsafe. I am instead only arguing that women feeling unsafe is not enough to justify calling something oppression.

The same is true for racism and racial oppression. For instance, some suggest that evidence of stop and frisk policies’ inherent racism is that black individuals feel demeaned by it. But, it seems to me that even if no black people felt demeaned the practice would quite obviously be oppressive. Suppose two black people are stopped by the cops, arbitrarily, and frisked heavily. For one of them this is no big deal, just a standard law and order procedure intended to keeps the streets safe. For the other person, this is a dehumanizing practice which he believes is unfair and intimidating. 

Given the racialized, disproportionate use of stop and frisk, I am inclined to say it is used as a tool of oppression and it’s acceptance by our society is a symptom of a larger scheme of systemic racism. If subjective experience of oppression were important in determining whether or not oppression was occurring, it would seem only one of these people was being oppressed though they undergo identical treatment, or that one of them was somehow more oppressed than the other. Both of these conclusions seem absurd.

Again, I am not saying the second person’s feelings are unimportant. One of the cruel facts of systemic, systematic oppression is that it generates scores of individuals that feel demeaned, intimidated, afraid, and hopeless. But, none of these emotions alone, without the requisite statistical evidence, are sufficient to constitute oppression. And consistent with this line of reasoning, the absence of those feelings is not evidence of the absence of oppression.

To drive this point home, I ask that you think of the wealthy, straight, white male who feels victimized by the increased prevalence of social justice dialogue. He feels society has turned on him, punishing him at every turn for the mistakes of his ancestors. He wants to express his discomfort but he feels outnumbered and intimidated into silence on these issues. He is afraid of the incredible tax increases he suspects will be a byproduct of the pursuit of social equality.

Is he oppressed?

Of course not. Society is currently, and has been historically, dedicated to his well being. That a prevailing wind of social outcries has been sweeping the nation (at least in it’s liberal bastions) makes him uncomfortable does not make him also oppressed. Why? Because oppression isn’t about feelings. Oppression is about systems of privilege and deprivation; it’s about deliberate and incidental phenomena which diminish the standing and experience of life of some individuals in a way predictable by race, gender, sexual orientation, economic class, or some other identifying marker.

This view seems more plausible, now, but it has very interesting implications. For example, adopting this view, which looks to understand oppression as a strictly objective, measurable phenomenon, might mean also acknowledging that there are instances in which individuals who belong to an oppressed group believed they are being oppressed when that is not the case. This phenomenon is called oppression anxiety.

Some, like Feminist Andrea Dworkin, have argued that everything constitutes oppression for women in a society that is wholly run by a patriarchal superstructure. Some race commentators have said the same for the black experience in a society predicated on white supremacy and hegemony. I am unready to adopt these extreme views because I can think of many instances in which women and blacks and other routinely oppressed groups are not being oppressed despite the excess of instances in which they are. 

For example, a woman who deeply loves a man (this scenario is purposely heteronormative because the object of the love needs to belong to a differently empowered class) and chooses to marry him is doing so out of her own volition and agency, and not because the patriarchy is making her do it. Furthermore, in the workplace, a woman is not sexually harassed in every instance during which she feels sexually harassed. Granted, she may be sexaully harassed in many instances, but were a male co-worker to comment on her appearance, only hoping to compliment her (and would also compliment a man in a similar fashion), it would be odd if that were considered sexual harassment simply because she didn’t appreciate the compliment or she would have rather not received it.

One might counter by pointing out that this situation is no different than the catcalling situation, and I’ve already explained why that is oppressive. But this situation is markedly different. First, the women might presumably know the man. Two, the man in this instance only intends to compliment and he would do this to a male co-worker as well (something that we know is not true with respect to catcalling), suggesting it isn’t about sex. 

Unquestionably, the woman’s uncomfortable feelings, if they were to arise, would come from her historically informed perspective that she is understood as out of place in certain occupational spaces and also that at times comments on her appearance are meant to sexualize her, robbing her of her dignity as an equal employee. But, in the above instance this is not occurring and the behavior of the man is not aimed at her being oppressed in this instance, even if Andrea Dworkin might argue that the weight of the patriarchy is bearing on her at all times.

I bring up oppression anxiety not to cast blame onto victims of oppression, I’ve already attempted to show I think oppression anxiety is an understandable phenomenon given the historical narrative of many groups. I also think it’s a prudent way to navigate the world, as there are oppressive elements distributed quite ubiquitously throughout our society and one would better be safe than sorry. I merely think that as more progress is made (and there is much progress to make) adopting an understanding of oppression that enables the identification of progress where it exists is an important part of the social justice cause. We wouldn’t want to waste our energy in battles we’ve already won.

It is important to change how we discuss oppression. If we continue to make sentimental arguments that rely on the feelings of the oppressed to show that oppression is real (as opposed to just showing how bad it is) we will continue to expose ourselves to terrible counter arguments that suggest racism, sexism, and homophobia can be fixed if we just teach the oppressed groups to not feel oppressed. Arguments that say things like “black people need to care more about school if they want to fix their plight” or “women need to be less sensitive if they really want equality”: these statements are direct responses to the idea that somehow all this oppression is in our heads. It’s not. There are statistics (incarceration rates, education funding, percentage of ceos and government officials, frequency of death by law enforcement, percentage of the nation’s wealth owned, prevalence of sexual violence  etc, etc, etc, etc) that show that it just is better (read: most conducive to a decent life) to be a white man in this society. People are being oppressed, and that fact isn’t contingent on how anyone feels about it.

P.S. I do think oppression anxiety has a counterpart emanating from the side of the oppressor. I think this counterpart is excessively more destructive and dangerous and I will talk about it at length next week.





