Title: Obsessing Over Optics
Category: Social Justice
Date: 2017/04/13

We’re all too familiar with Republican’s crusade against Planned Parenthood. The thought of reversing the strides we’ve made to empower women to exercise their reproductive rights and increase access to healthcare troubles me greatly. Also troubling is the narrative to which Republicans cling. They persistently tell us that abortion is wrong and Planned Parenthood, because it provides so many abortions, must be defunded and eliminated. Now, even if you have moral objections to abortion, which I’d love to talk through with you in the comments, you have to acknowledge that Planned Parenthood as an organization is about so much more than just abortion. In fact, as I previously listed in “UnPlanned Parenthood”: “their most common service offered is actually STI testing and treatment (41%), followed by information and materials for contraception (34%), followed by other women’s health services and initiatives (11%), followed by cancer screening and prevention (10%).” Abortions only account for 3 percent of Planned Parenthood’s budget and services.

And Republicans know this. So why do they continue to harp endlessly about abortion? The reason is simple...it’s all about the optics.

The advent of 24hr news coverage and the more recent addition of the ubiquitous presence of Social Media has created an environment in which most of us feel like we’re always being watched and always plugged in. Anything you do or say can be viewed and subsequently judged by friends and strangers alike, and, if you’re a politician, by voters, too. This, I believe, is why smart men (and it’s almost entirely men); doctors, lawyers, business people, and community activist who hold elected office in this country continue to spout the lie that Planned Parenthood is reducible entirely to its abortive service—even though they know, and you and I know they know, that is simply not true.

But this isn’t exclusively a Republican problem. Indeed the Democrats and political left suffer from this same predicament. It’s most common manifestation and unfortunate on the left is equally troubling.

Surely you’ve heard the standard story. Black people are over-represented in the crime statistics and prison because of the War on Drugs. If it weren’t for the over-policing of drugs, we could solve mass incarceration and also begin to heal the relationship between blacks and the police. A quaint narrative that is just plain wrong.

Don’t get me wrong, I’ve acknowledged in many previous posts the blatant discrimination in America’s enforcement of drug laws and in our criminal justice system more broadly. Young black men, specifically, are overwhelmingly targeted for drug arrest and convictions despite equally overwhelmingly evidence that they use drugs at the same rates as whites their white peers...IF NOT At A LOWER. But, when it comes to mass incarceration and black criminality, focusing on drugs plays a similar role as focusing on abortion in the Planned Parenthood context; it distracts from the actual facts of the matter, substituting instead a narrative more pleasing to the people galvanized around the issue.

Now, I know many of you may be confused, but I’ll share some stats with you to ground my contention. In *Escaping from the Standard Story: Why the Conventional Wisdom on Prison Growth is Wrong, and Where We Can Go From Here*, John Pfaff of Fordham Law School thoroughly explores the notion that mass incarceration is a matter of too many drug convictions, eviscerating the hypothesis in the process. He explains that despite America’s prison population at the State level **where the overwhelming majority of prisoners are held** the percentage of those imprisoned for drug crimes is only %17. That means 83% of the people in prison are for non-drug offenses, further demonstrating most prisoners are serving sentence for convictions mostly on violent crime (50% according to prisonpolicy.org) and property crime (19%), and the remainder on public order offenses. Pfaff acknowledges, as will I, “it is possible that the war on drugs could have important indirect effects”. And those indirect effects may be culpable for an additional few percentage points, but that still leaves about ⅘ of those in jail being jailed for things other than drug crimes. This means mass incarceration simply has to be more complex than the War on Drugs.

And indeed, returning to black criminality specifically, the overrepresentation of blacks in prisons is also not reducible to the over-policing of drugs; even if it might still be related to over-policing. This is not arguments that blacks are predisposed to committing more crime, or even an argument that the system is racially fair outside of the drug context, it is not! These statistics, however, are readily available. So why are our politicians and our social activists harping on a small part of the problem and ignoring the larger reality?

Again, it’s the optics. Focusing on the War on Drugs provides a comfortable story which doesn’t force us to deal with the reality that young black men commit more crime: Accounting for 50% of those arrested for violent crimes and also accounting for 50% of those arrested for murder, according to FBI Crime statistics for 2015 (Table 43c) Why that is is where we need robust discussion. We need to talk about making less things illegal generally. We need to talk about schools, which many do. We need to talk about economic inclusivity, which many do. We need to talk about gun control, which many do. And we need to talk about dismantling a culture of violence prevalent in many inner-cities, which many less are willing to.

Why?

Because it’s offensive. It makes us uncomfortable. If everyone is equal and racism is wrong, why do black people commit more crime? We scramble to far corners to try to find excuses, justifications, and alternative facts that make the statistics not true. But what we must do instead is acknowledge the truth and try to further dissect the social facts which create this anomaly. I do not believe black people are imbued with a crime gene. I think many social forces conspire to create the unfortunate reality of increased black criminality, including institutional poverty, limited opportunity, discrimination in hiring and promoting, the War on Drugs, etc, etc, etc...but getting past these problems will mean directing our resources and, more pertinent here, our attention at the real problems. The War on Drugs is an abomination against our society, but the disproportionate attention it receives and space it takes up in the narrative is crippling our ability to actually get past the legacies of slavery and discrimination which much evidence suggests is the root cause of the black criminality and subsequent overrepresentation in prisons in a way very similar to how focusing on abortions at Planned Parenthood skews any real discussion of what the true value the organization has for women’s health.

Abortion/Planned Parenthood and the War on Drugs are but two of very many similarly distorted political issues that are distorted primarily in the name of painting a better picture to generate more support to promote more action. But we cannot continue under that kind of guiding principle. We have to address what is and be less concerned with what it looks like to do so. Feelings will be hurt. Reputations will be damaged and stigmas will be created. But that is what is currently happening. At least with the approach I suggest, we might just be able to do something about it.

Just look at Congress, refusing to work amongst themselves for fear of being viewed as weak or compromising, or traitorous. The men and women in those halls do not harbor the ill will for one another they present to you. Many of them are friends and share casual discussion when the cameras aren’t on. But when they know the people can see them, they put on facade to appease. Seems harmless except we viewers then accept that posturing and use it amongst ourselves; mimicking their behavior with one another, shutting ourselves off from discussing the most pressing issues of our days with anyone who dare think under another banner. 

In our social discourse we are so obsessed with using the rights words and the right terms that our the substance of any given message is hard to glean. We are truly living in the age of form over substance and this cannot be allowed to persist. People are dying!

I simply care about these issues too much to let the idea of upsetting people paralyze our society. Some will read this post and check out once they see true things that make them uncomfortable. That’s why some have chosen instead to give in to the optic crazed World...they need an audience and that cannot be avoided. But it is this simple: if you care as much as many claim to at least consider what I am saying. Just entertain the thought that maybe we have become a little too obsessed with optics. And, if you would, entertain the further contention that backing away from that obsession might enable us to continue progressing our society. America has come along way. It’s racial and gender past are sickening. But we got made strides forward by acknowledging hard truths: Slavery wasn’t about property (the optic), it was race-based discrimination that deprived people of their humanity (the truth); It was less important that we be comfortable with the roles women hold (the optic) and more important that we accept their humanity and allow them the full range of options to achieve their fullest personhood(the truth, and we have much work to do): segregation wasn’t separate but equal (the optic), it was a perpetuation of discrimination and it further created lasting inequality (the truth), and it’s not over (the optic) and persists in *de facto through self-selection and discrete policy (the truth): gay intimacy wasn’t about lust and deviancy (the optic), it was about allowing people to choose whom to be intimate with (the truth). This list could go on but my point is simple, unless we are again willing to eschew our obsession over how things look and again get back to having the tough conversations, the ones that make us uncomfortable, then we are done progressing...whether you call yourself a progressive, a conservative, a liberal, Republican, Democrat or any other bullshit title we use these days to denote that we are not like the others.

P.S. It would be a huge mistake to read this post as suggesting the War on Drugs is an unimportant speaking point. It is very important. The point of this post is to provide powerful and familiar examples to illustrate an endemic problem with our political and social discourse. We have become entirely too concerned with staging things to appease people instead of actually solving problems. I recognize the importance of avoiding emotional injury and weeding out bigotry. Do you recognize the importance of deal with the world as it is if you hope to change it?
