Title: Other People’s Rights
Category: Political Philosophy
Date: 2016/01/21

I have noticed for a very long time that people, in their advocacy for plans to improve society, are often willing to sacrifice other people’s rights in the hopes of forwarding their policy goals. This, I believe, is one of the largest blindspots on all sides of the social justice debate.

On the right, calls to bar all muslims from entering and reentering the country are motivated by a desire for greater security. So is the advocacy for increased surveillance of Mosques and of muslims in general. Same can be said of the support for policies like stop and frisk that obviously violate the rights of the people forced to undergo them; usually minorities. It’s also present in calls for mandatory minimum sentencing which cut into people’s due process rights. I would even say this disregard for other people’s rights is present in support for the prohibition of many narcotics.

On the left, despite what we like to think, there are equally as many offenses. In the name of inclusion liberals have begun demanding a reduction in free speech rights. Some feminist advocates, as I suggested last week, have pushed for adjudicatory standards that stack the deck against accused men in sexual assault cases, denying them a fair opportunity to present their side before they are condemned.

One understands how a fear of the destruction of terrorism or frustration at the inequities of our society can make people anxious or upset enough to support the aforementioned policies. But, what we must keep in mind is that all these policies, though motivated by a desire for a safer or more inclusive society, directly impact the lives of other people. Pursuing a better society can’t come at the price of sacrificing people along the way. We have to remember, our conception of “the good” is not the same as other people’s.

But much more importantly, we have to remember that our country is founded on the idea that every person gets to be judged as an individual. Therein lies the great injustice all these policies share. Asking all muslims to bear a burden because some terrorists happen to be muslim is completely unreasonable. Doing so sends the message that the safety of some segments of the population is more important than the liberty of others. One can only assume that is so because some segments of the population are seen as more valuable than others. This is also present in calls for an end to black lives matter protests. Your convenience does not trump their right to assemble.

The same injustice is present when some feminists tell men that combating rape, and to an extent combating sexism at large, will require sacrificing their rights instead of just their privileges. I understand there exists a network of sexism which keeps women oppressed in some regards. But a good portion of that network is comprised of individuals who don’t mean to partake in that oppression. And, alienating those individuals will do little to destroy the network. And again we must be vigilant against asking for any decrease in speech, even if its consequence is repugnant to our beliefs and sense of fairness. Sharing ideas is the ultimate goal of greater diversity and inclusion. That won’t be possible if we establish an inclusive society that demands no one ever talk in a way that offends someone else.

The point is simple. People have rights. That sometimes, in the exercise of those rights, harm occurs, is not in itself enough to justify sacrificing those rights. The whole reason our rights are guaranteed as opposed to just granted is because many people realized that despite some harms that may occur, our society is better when the most people have the most liberty. Granted, some expressions of a right go too far and lead to harms so great that the right must be curtailed. But, when that happens, it should be curtailed by asking those with the right to sacrifice it; we shouldn’t take their rights by force. That will only breed resentment and distrust. A society that deprives people of rights to forward the interests of select segments of the population is undercutting itself. So, next time you’re advocating any policy, ask yourself if you’ve considered all the people affected by that choice.

We all don't want the government subverting our liberties. We should want that equally strongly for our fellow citizens.

P.S. In this post, though I mentioned political rights, I also was making an appeal to moral rights as well. But, because of the difficulty in identifying universally accepted moral rights, I think using this post to refer to political rights exclusively is defensible and perhaps preferable. Lastly, I think this post also applies to gun rights, something I didn’t notice while writing but can’t ignore now that I’ve finished.
