Title: Police Shootings Are Not Just About Race
Category: Race
Date: 2016/07/28

Sadly another summer has ushered in another wave of high profile police killings, this time accompanied by high profile killings of police as wll. These tragic events, and their all to common racial overtones, propel race to the forefront of our collective consciousness. But, as is often the case, race, it’s own dynamic entity, is a gloss on a much larger problem in America. 

Much like poverty isn’t a racial phenomenon but it disproportionately affects minority communities, so too is police violence. It isn’t that all these cops are acting from racial animus (though some likely are). It’s more, I believe, that America has a system of low accountability for cops wielding increasingly sophisticated and destructive tech under more and more permissive standards of conduct. And, unfortunately, this predicament, like most others, is exacerbated in minority community where rampant crime once made tough policing a necessity but now the excess of cops on the streets merely acts as intimidation and a constant reminder of one’s vulnerability to the State.

Don’t get me wrong: statistics on police killings certainly suggest they are but one manifestation of a much larger cultural norm of racism. Since 2015 according to the Washington Post, 1,502 people have been murdered by on-duty police; 732 white, 381 black, 382 of other races. According to where you look, black people make up about 13% of the United States population, yet they account for 24% of those killed by police. More egregiously, blacks comprise a disproportionate share of the United States prison population, too, at 37.7% of the federal prison population. It’s hard not to ignore the clear racial bias in the dispersal of government force.

But it’s not just blacks. A disproportionate share of black people are jailed and killed, but also way too many people are jailed and killed. According to the BBC, the US has the highest rate of imprisonment at 724 persons per 100,000 people. Leading both Russia and China. And 732 white persons killed by cops is also too many.

The disproportionate share of this imprisonment and aforementioned police fatalities tells a much more nuanced story than one of pure racial hate. There was a time, not too long ago, when many black inner city neighborhoods were crime havens. According to the DOJ, from 1980 to 2008, blacks, then even a smaller percentage of the population, accounted for 52.5% of homicides. I don’t think it’s inappropriate to concentrate policing in communities of high crime. Present day Chicago is an unfortunate extension of that violence.

The unintended consequences of this greater policing in high crime areas was a focus on things incidentally related to violent crime like drug peddling, use, and gangs. The War on Drugs led to the arrest of countless non-violent offenders, disproportionately black of course, because the cops were being excessively deployed to those neighborhoods to stop violent crime. Many of those non-violent offenders have served excessive terms thanks to mandatory minimums and former three strike policies. So, while it is not clear that pure racial hate established the excess policing in black neighborhoods (even if it was a factor) it is clear that the excess policing in black neighborhoods promotes racial hate by creating a class of vulnerable people and a narrative of heightened criminality. 

But whenever the topic of heightened crime rates for blacks is broached, I think it’s inappropriate to do so without acknowledging the racial history of robbery, subordination, and marginalization that was meant to purposefully impoverish and exploit an entire racial community. I think it’s also important to realize that even if some people who are black commit violent crimes, most people who are black do not. It is this last realization that cops, and much of the greater American Society fails to realize: **NOT ALL BLACK PEOPLE ARE A THREAT TO YOU SIMPLY BY BEING BLACK**. Black criminals, like white criminals, are criminals because of their personal narrative and not because of their skin color.

I do not intend to mitigate or ignore the racial biases evident in these phenomena. I just think caching these things as purely racial issues alienates allies in this fight for a better society along race and humanitarian lines. I guess my point is best captured by a question: is there an acceptable level of unarmed black people killed by police? Is that number 13%? If your answer is no, then surely you can see how that answer remains no for white people and all other races as well. And if you see that, then perhaps you can further see how solving the problem of police fatalities, as it relates to black bodies especially, is a matter of acknowledging all variables at play in these situations, and also acknowledging all victims. Isolating just the episodes involving black victims, I believe, decreases opportunity to examine all possible trends and do our best to alter the laws for the use of force and our policies surrounding incarceration which will enable the most good for the most people.

This post may be greeted with hostility. But I suspect my post next week will help. Simply put, I’m not sure I believe it’s possible to get past racism in this country, anymore. This is shifting my attention to how to have the best society possible where racism still exists.

P.S. In America, bad things happen. They tend to happen disproportionately to black people. I do not hope for a society of proportionate badness.
