Title: 5 Ways to Undercut Racism in 2015
Date:  2015/01/01

I dont put much stock into the idea of New Years resolutions. I figure, why not change something you dont like as soon as youre sure you dont like it? To me it seems resolutions, in general, are just a way to postpone action; this hypothesis thoroughly supported by the Arab-Israeli conflict, which has seen numerous resolutions, but not much progress. But, Id be foolish to ignore how seriously our society takes New Years resolutions. So, in that spirit, here are five ways wecan drastically improve our dialogue about race in 2015.</p>

1.  ##### **Lets stop making this struggle all about Black men.**

    Aiyana Jones, Rekia Boyd, Yvette Smith, Tarika Wilson, Tyisha Miller, and many more women of color have died at the hands of police in very similar fashion to the stories we see on national media. We cant continue to remove their stories from our narrative of oppression. Black women, believe it or not, make up roughly fifty percent of all black people. Furthermore, the black woman, perhaps, feels the pressures of institutional racism more heavily than the black man, as entrenched poverty, marginalization in the workforce, and single-parenting are problems that black women face at a higher instance than black men. When we ignore black women in our discussions of race, we rob ourselves of a lot of data which provides further evidence to support the claim that people in our society are oppressed on the basis of skin color as a function of unjust laws and engrained biases and we also turn our backs on one of societys most vulnerable populations: our mothers, sisters, daughters, grandmothers, wives, and close friends. Just saying, lets do this together. (Also, there is nothing more hypocritical than suggesting that its okay that the black man be a synecdoche for black people because its how language is used and the black woman is implied. If you believe that, then you must also be content with the white person standing as a synecdoche for all people. That is also the traditional way to view things).

2.  ##### **Lets stop making the good cop bad cop distinction and acting as if the race of the cop is relevant.**

    It is inconsequential to focus on the race of the cop. Whether it be a White cop, a Hispanic cop, or a   Black cop, the important thing to consider about the situation is how the way the situation is informed by the historical treatment ofblacks in this country juxtaposed, of course, with the drastically different, one might say privileged, white experience. The issue at hand is the relationship of authority to black bodies.

    Hopefully this also helps explain why phrasing the situation in terms of bad cops is ill-advised. If the real problem is systemic discrimination and oppression, isolating each episode of police aggression as the actions of one deranged manwith a badge undermines any attempt to establish correlations and identify patterns; things very necessary to show the institutional nature of the problem, and the likewise institutional nature a solution will have to have.

    Think about it this way: good cops do their job according to procedure. Stop and Frisk is a legal procedure which is purposefully used disproportionately against people of color (indeed, former Mayor Michael Bloomberg wanted more black people stopped and frisked, as 80% of the stops being comprised of 90% innocent black people, wasnt enough). Therefore, one might say that good cops disproportionately stop and frisk people of color, a somewhat paradoxical proposition.

    The laws and procedures are unjust. It doesnt matter if a cop is a nice guy who is himself not racist, he has signed up to carry out laws that function to intimidate, marginalize, and oppress people. He may not be a bad person, but he is employed in an institution that carries out the will of a racist, corrupt society.

3.  ##### **Lets stop making these kinds of arguments: If [unarmed black person] would have been more compliant, [unarmed black person] would still be alive.**

    For starters, this line of reasoning is completely untrue. The stories of Sean Bell and Oscar Grant provide ample evidence that compliance does not guarantee survival. Moreover, this argument is rather silly when you consider the empirically proven lopsided treatment of black people at the hands of the law and judicial system. Essentially, people who forward this argument are offering a disgusting dichotomy: Give in to oppression or die. Would these people have similarly asked the Jews to obey the Nazis to increase their chance of survival? 	
    As English Philosopher John Austin reminds us: the existence of law is one thing; its merit or demerit is another. Just because something is legal, doesnt mean its right. Its about time we start looking at the murderer and a little less at the behavior of the person who was murdered. Surely some people do warrant the death penalty, according to our laws (I may have to revisit this whole death penalty thing) but all people are owed due process. Its a right so important our constitution promised it twice (i.e in the 5th Amendment and 14th Amendment). Being killed by police does not fall into those parameters. You do support the Constitution, dont you?

4.  ##### **Lets put the burden of proof back on the government.**

    The character of the murdered individual is routinely on trial when courts and juries are attempting to decide what kind of legal repercussions are to be levied against cops and other governmental actors that carry out injustices on peopl of color. But my understanding of our judicial system is that we assume individuals are innocent until they are proven guilty. If that is the case, then a murdered individual should be assumed to be wrongly killed unless the officer can prove he was acting reasonably. 
    Surely the conduct of the murdered individual is relevant exculpatory evidence. But the evidence matters at trial. So, lets start having trials for cops. At which time they can prove their innocence. But we cant keep assuming the cop acted reasonably and the murdered person deserved to be killed. Its this current way of dealing with these situations which liberates cops to use deadly force more frequently and with less hesitation. One obvious institutional change to decrease the number of unarmed people murdered by cops, a crime disproportionately happening to people of color, is to punish that behavior with more than paid vacations.

5.  ##### **Lets remember that were not talking about disembodied statistics; were talking about people.**

    The breadth of the influence of institutional racism is quite large. These phenomena affect so many people its easy to forget that at the end of the day were talking about individual people with lives, families, hopes, fears, and futures. As we go further and further down the rabbithole of statistics, lets not forget that fact. Whether or not youre skeptical of the accounts of racial politics commonly promulgated, people are dying. People are being denied access to promise
rights and necessary goods. People are spending their entire lives without hope. This is unacceptable.

P. S. Good luck with your new diets, personality changes, workout plans, and goals for the New Year. I hope that you will at least consider also adopting these changes; I hope that you will also start pledging your effort to things that matter!
