Title: Religion is Gay
Category: LGBTQ Rights
Date: 2016/04/21

In North Carolina, a recent legislative act, House Bill 2 (HB2), which was passed on March 26th, 2016, has retracted rights recently granted to LGBTQ persons by various municipalities within the state. The most talked about of those rights is the ability of transpersons to use the bathroom that matched their identified sex, even if it did not match their biological sex. To many, this appeared another example of animus directed at the LGBTQ community. To others, this was merely a protective measure aimed at keeping deviant actors from exploiting vulnerable bathroom goers. Both of these perspectives, I believe, are woefully simplistic.

I don’t think it’s just hate that motivates these kinds of legislative acts, though I would certainly not rule that out as a very prominent motivation. Coupled with that animus, however, is often a deep misunderstanding of what it means to be an L or a G or a B or a T or a Q. Our recent interests in LGBTQ issues has lead to increased research of homosexuality, transpeople, and queerness. This increased study has led to dramatic reformulations of how we understand sexuality; moving from it being about religious dictates of choices, to the socially constructed straight-gay binary, to Kinsey’s notions of fluidity, to a study published in 2015 by Washington State University suggesting sexuality may actually be categorical (Norris, Marcus, and Green 2015). In this whirlwind of complex terms and changing definitions, it is very hard to grasp what it means to be an LGBTQ person. 

I suspect, however, that this ironic analogy will help.

What if instead of framing LGBTQ identity politics in terms of sexuality, we discussed it in religious terms?

Imagine a person born into the Christian religion. Statistically speaking, this person is very likely to remain a Christian as the vast majority of religious people practice the local religion or the religion practiced by their parents. In other words, religion seems to be just another social more we adopt as children. Even given this, some people still choose to alter how they practice their religion from the explicit dictates of the community and their parents. They may, for example, change how they pray or which books of the Bible they think is important (because apparently choose). They may like being Christian but think that certain provisions of Christianity are not consistent with their inner truth. Indeed that is how we have gotten all the current diversity we have in the Christian religion. 

This is kind of how I understand being gay or lesbian. One is born man or woman. One learns to perform as a man or as a woman by following the social examples of man and woman exhibited throughout society. Statistically speaking, this mold works pretty well for most people. But when one learns that socially prescribed parts of being a man or a woman, maybe the parts about sex with women or men, respectively, just don’t seem consistent with their inner truth a certain unease is created. Much like with religion, this realization/acknowledgment can happen at anytime or at any age. In an attempt to rectify the contradiction they feel they are living, gay and lesbian people choose to deviate from the heterosexual, social norm. They may further choose to change certain things about how they dress, speak, and so forth in an attempt to better align their presentation of themselves with their conception of themselves. If you can see how Protestants are still Christian’s even though they forego many of the intricacies of Catholicism, surely you can also see how gay men and lesbian women are still men and women even if they eschew some of the things that might historically have been associated with being a man or woman.

There are of course essential features of being Christian, much like there must, if being a man actually means something, be essential features for being a man. I think the burden is on those looking to disqualify the man-ness or woman-ness of gays or lesbians to establish the essential characteristics of man or woman and to identify where a gay or lesbian person falls short simply by being gay or lesbian. Good Luck! 

Some people are pleased with what Christianity offers but would like to supplement their religious experience. They may bring in elements of other religions or interpret parts of Christianity in unorthodox ways.

This is kind of how I understand bisexuality. It’s not a matter of indecision. Instead, it’s simply supplementing what society says is standard or normal sexual behavior with more to make it fulfilling and satisfying for a specific individual. Moreover, I don’t bisexuality is as uncommon as we all would like to think.

Moving on…

For some born into Christianity, continuing life as a Christian is simply not an option; perhaps because the religion itself is unappealing, perhaps because another religion seems to better fit their inner truth.Some of these people will abstain from religion altogether, choosing to construct their own normative rules for their lives, perhaps borrowing from other religions.

The people who change religion or are trans-religious, to me, resemble transpersons in motivations. Both groups, despite being born into a certain predicament, and being told that they were a certain thing for much of their lives, choose not to adopt the identity society has chosen for them. Much like Christians like to celebrate people who find their way to Jesus, it can be equally praiseworthy for an individual displeased with their selected sex to make the decision to change it. And, when that decision is made, who are we to disrespect it? Would we ever tolerate a law that forced people born Christian to continue to go to church to pray if they realized later in life they’d rather be Muslim and thus would be more comfortable in a mosque? Would we tolerate attacks on Muslims who used to be Christian? (Unfortunately this grotesque society actually might.)

As for people born into Christianity who would rather just do away with the whole religion thing,This is how I understand queer people, and why I think much more of the population is “queer” than is acknowledged. The truth is there just aren’t that many perfect Christians. Much the same, there are likely not many perfectly heterosexual people. We can choose to align ourselves with a strict Christianity much like we can choose to align with a strict heterosexuality, but doing either will likely involve some sacrifice. There are social benefits to both choices, and potential cosmic benefits to one, but do we really want to force that choice on people, either directly or indirectly through social coercion and invidious legal discrimination like HB2? And, even if we want to, do you really think we should be able to?

P.S. I do not hope to construe homosexuality as a choice in this post, though, as I explained in “A Persistent Mistake in the Advocacy of Gay Rights” I don’t think it matters if being gay is a choice. The intimate associations people choose and the way individuals express themselves with respect to masculinity and femininity, in my opinion, are not appropriate objects of the law so long as all parties involved are capable of consenting and have.

P.P.S. I also hope this post is not understood as speaking on behalf of LGBTQ people. I simply was hoping to relay a schema that may help some overcome their biases.
