Title: The Script
Date: 17/01/05
Category: Social Justice

The world sucks! Things for group A are terrible and the primary reason is group B. Group A faces routine and predictable denials of fairness; their pain ignored or forgotten, their transgressions recorded and amplified. Group B, on the other hand, receives special treatment. It’s stunning how people seem completely blind or unconcerned with group B’s continual iniquities. It’s most shocking when you compare how people treat group B with how people treat group A. There are so many rules for group A’s conduct and so many standards by which they are judged. But, no one ever applies those standards to group B. Group B gets free reign to do all kinds of bad stuff with impunity while group A is held accountable for any mistake by any member. Group A people are never treated as individuals, and social forces keep this rigid, unfair system in place. Demolishing this social order requires a few things.

For starters, you cannot look at group B’s behavior individually. It is important to look at how what seems like individual deeds done by distinct members of group B are actually interconnected denials of justice or dignity aimed at group A because group A is group A or systemic problems inherent to group B as group B. Moreover, internally, group B is rife with contradiction and malfeasance. Perhaps the greatest contradiction inherent to group B is group B’s insistence that each member of group A take responsibility for group A’s shortcomings while members of group B are not met with the same obligation.

Some ignorant people try to say group B is actually the oppressed group. They point to isolated, unconnected transgressions against individuals in group B. They focus on those individual cases and try to give them more meaning than they actually hold in the narrative of the relationship between group A and group B. There are bad people in group A, but the badness of members of group B is different. When a member of group A does a bad thing, only that individual member is doing that bad thing. Group B, however, will try to hold all of group A accountable, or group B will stereotype group A as more likely to commit that bad behavior...

By now you may have realized I’m telling a familiar story. But do you also see how the script embodies a contradiction? Plug in any two opposing groups for group A and B. It should be clear why our social discourse has stagnated and why we are so polarized. For far too many of us, this script is how we approach the social justice fight. We know what group we fight for, and we know what group that fight is against. We complain of the generalities group A faces, and we generally describe the culprit as group B. We are unsympathetic to group B’s claims that they are actually the suffering group.

If we are going to actually march toward social equity, especially in our current political climate, then the script must be abandoned. No group is all good, no group is all bad. We have to become able to see group B much as we see group A, a coincidental amalgam of people born into social contexts they do not control, of histories they did not choose, trying their best to understand themselves and the world around them. 
P.S. I think this post has the most value when you make whatever group you think is group A stand in place of group B (e.g if you think men are group A, try putting women as group A and men as group B and running through the script). From that vantage maybe you’ll see why it’s so damn hard to start the conversation.


 
