Title: Social Justice Shadowboxing
Category: Social Justice
Date: 2015/12/10

My worse fears are coming true. When I wrote “Oppression Is Not Subjective”, my number one fear was that people advocating for a more equitable society through sentimental pandering and subjective characterizations of oppression would eventually go too far; that at some point the correlation between negative emotions and oppression would be conflated to the point where historical victims of oppression would come to understand every instance of hurt feelings as instances of oppression. I believe that day is upon us.

All over the internet there are videos, articles, and posts, all of which amount to little more than: my feelings are hurt so I must be being oppressed. This is the exact kind of thinking which threatens to derail any hopes of continuing to move our society toward a more equitable distribution of economic, social, and political resources. Feeling oppressed can never be enough to prove one is oppressed. A point that I think is especially obvious considering one could certainly be oppressed, not know or it or not recognize it, and thus not feeling negatively about it. Oppression and negative emotions and not the same thing.

I think a lot of this comes as the result of sentimental pandering. By this I mean attempts to recruit allies and demonstrate oppression by appealing exclusively to the emotional pain of the group whose oppression is in question. While emotion experience is an important part of understanding what makes oppression bad, it can never alone prove oppression. One must also show why said negative emotional experience is of the kind that a person has a right not to experience and that the negative emotional reaction is proportional to the actual injustice occurring. We cannot first identify the pain and then create the injustice. Approaching the social justice fight that way will certainly lead to the correct identification of many instances of oppression (because there is so much oppression in our society), but it will also result in labeling as oppression every instance of hypersensitivity and anxiety; and that’s not justice.

Moreover, if we are incorrectly identifying injustices, then when we attempt to fight those injustices what we are doing amounts to little more than shadowboxing (i.e. fighting imaginary opponents); either that, or the much worse alternative: infringing on people’s liberty to direct their lives, committing the exact kind of injustice we are always speaking out against.That kind of hypocriticism has no place in any movement truly dedicated to fairness. The truth is: no one in our society has a right to never have their feelings hurt and not every grievance is entitled to an external remedy. It is easy to forget, in our haste to make our society more fair, that every call for more resources and remedies to oppression is a call for the sacrifice of resources from the oppressor. The oppressor already has very little interest in relinquishing privileges. Do we actually expect him to give in to demands that make no effort to actually explain oppression, and instead just say “our feelings are hurt, take our word for it”?

To people who would counter by appealing to the ubiquity of oppression and the disparity of power between oppressor and oppressed I ask:

Can you really not imagine even one instance where someone might feel wronged in a situation where it is there hypersensitivity that is the culprit? No one should be forced to eat poison. But, for some people, peanuts are poison. Should we outlaw peanuts? Granted this analogy is weakened by the fact that peanut allergies are genetic diseases that one can’t just get over, but I think my point still holds: just because it hurts you doesn’t mean it’s bad. I guess a better analogy would be to look at phobias. When someone has an unreasonable fear, society should not destroy every manifestation of that fear. Instead, we encourage the person to seek help and to learn to deal with their fear. We don’t say the fear is unimportant or that the person’s emotional suffering is not worth fixing, which is not what I’m suggesting about oppression anxiety. What we do is try to show why the feared thing shouldn’t be feared, understanding all the while that the fear is likely inspired by a genetic disposition that at one point in time was useful and probably saved lives. Oppression anxiety is the similar. It is born of a way of thinking which often correctly identifies injustices and thus may over time come to consume the subject.

Some people wonder how we got here. There are different hypotheses. Some think it is a necessary move to combat injustice, and they are willing to accept the collateral damage. Others think it’s the PC police trying to control our speech. I’m increasingly becoming of the belief that it’s a little column A and a little column B.

With respect to the PC police contention, I am becoming increasingly aware of a phenomenon I’ll call logic-shaming. This happens when someone is accused of being insensitive, bigoted, or some other negative thing just because they have opted for a purely rational approach to examining social phenomena. The problem with logic-shaming is it disincentivizes people from applying critical thinking skills, instead insisting that they suppress their skepticism and accept any testimony emanating from an oppressed group.

I think a more appropriate formula would be the one famously announced by the Supreme Court in a famous footnote in *United States v. Carolene Products Co.*(1938):

**There may be narrower scope for operation of the presumption of constitutionality when legislation appears on its face to be within a specific prohibition of the Constitution, such as those of the first ten amendments, which are deemed equally specific when held to be embraced within the Fourteenth. . . .
It is unnecessary to consider now whether legislation which restricts those political processes which can ordinarily be expected to bring about repeal of undesirable legislation, is to be subjected to more exacting judicial scrutiny under the general prohibitions of the Fourteenth Amendment than are most other types of legislation. . . .
Nor need we inquire whether similar considerations enter into the review of statutes directed at particular religious . . . or national . . . or racial minorities . . . : whether prejudice against discrete and insular minorities may be a special condition, which tends seriously to curtail the operation of those political processes ordinarily to be relied upon to protect minorities, and which may call for a correspondingly more searching judicial inquiry. . .**

The heart of this statement by Justice Stone is that when considering whether or not something is oppressive or unjust, we should err on the side of caution before dismissing the claim of a marginalized group that their rights are being violated. We shouldn’t, however, accept the testimony outright. This quote shows an exceptional level of sensitivity to the fact that oppression can be insidious, while not giving into the paranoia that we should blindly accept any claim of oppression.

If oppression is claimed by a historically mistreated group, we should closely scrutinize the entity that group claims is oppressing them and the mechanism by which they argue the oppression occurs. Given the functioning of our society, we will often find oppression. What we should not do is presume guilt. When we give in to our emotions and fears as opposed to relying on objective metrics and predictive hypotheses, we necessarily create boogeymen (unless you think we’re infallible). In a democratic society, discussion and close examination of ideas is our greatest ally. We should promote these values as often as we can because it is only when the oppressors steps outside of their emotions and preconceived notions that we have any chance of actually moving toward equality. But if we mimic their emotional reasoning and unwillingness to be objective, it is only a matter of time before we ourselves become unconcerned with justice, and instead seek a supremacy of our own.

P.S. I hope this post will be understood in the proper context, namely one that acknowledges that intersectional oppression is a prominent feature of our society. This is not an argument that racism and sexism don’t exist. It is a plea that we actually hold ourselves to the standard we ask our society to abide by. 
 


