Title: Black People Need to Stop Resisting
Category: Race
Date: 2015/07/23

People actually offer this foolishness as helpful advice. There are people who say “black people need to stop resisting” who actually think they’re being advocates. And, indeed they are. They are perfectly advocating the systemic oppression of black people and what now simply must be considered an extinguishment of black lives. If you subscribe to what I’ll call from this point on the compliance argument, you are, maybe unwittingly, perpetuating racism and oppression.

The compliance argument as it is used against black people usually sounds something like this: if black people would obey officers and be less confrontational, their encounters with law enforcement would be less hostile and volatile, ultimately decreasing the number of rough arrests and murders.

Like most tacitly racist argumentation, this nonsense is full of delusions, victim-blaming, and, of course white supremacy.

The opening premise of this argument is laughable. The argument asks us to accept that black people, when confronted, should be less confrontational. It is inspired by a grand delusion many white people hold, that people are only stopped by the cops if they have done something wrong or are suspected of having done something wrong. But black people know that is just untrue. As we know from statistics collected on the former usage of stop and frisk in NYC, black people are overwhelmingly disproportionately stopped by cops, and they are also overwhelmingly innocent. When you are stopped by cops so often, at a certain point you’ve taken all the orders you can take (I personally know this to be true). At a certain point you recall that you are not simply a punching bag for law enforcement; you’re a citizen with rights and a human with an entitlement to dignified treatment, and perpetual harassment by law enforcement infringes on both. So, while you may comply the first time you’re stopped, by the third or fourth episode in a short period of time, you may be justifiably annoyed.

Stern proponents of this argument may hold that the wise thing to do, even if you are justifiably upset, is to keep your cool and escape the situation without confrontation. But that isn’t real advice. It offers no recourse and no solution. It only grants the false hope that if blacks are the perfect amount of well-behaved maybe they’ll escape their current predicament. The problem is they will surely be met with the situation again. The most well-tempered response only buys so much freedom.

And, why should black people take oppression in stride? I’ve seen way too many white people curse at cops, get in cops faces, directly disobey cops orders. Those white people were told to calm down, to relax. They were called sir and ma'am. They were treated with dignity; and that’s the largest problem with the opening tenet of this argument. It not only ignores the frequency with which blacks are given orders by cops, it also refuses to admit the double standard blacks face with respect to how cops treat them. Only blacks and other minorities are asked to comply...whites are asked to cooperate.

This is why the second clause is equally as misinformed. The hostility often present in interactions between black people and cops is usually only contingently related to the actual interaction between the person and the officer. The United States has a gruesome history of violence against black bodies that was both sanctioned and carried out by formal legal institutions. Through the eyes of many black people, police officers represent a contemporary extension of that violence. You may say that’s ridiculous, but the incessant murders of unarmed black individuals begs to differ with your gut feeling. We can’t keep ignoring the historical trajectory of law enforcement's relationship with black communities.

The biggest problem with this truly pathetic reasoning exists in the last clause. If the goal is ultimately a decrease in blacks being assaulted and murdered by police, why would you not focus on the party doing the assaulting and murdering? Asking blacks to be compliant is like making your primary advice to rape victims that they not struggle so their attacker doesn't kill them. It might be true, but your focus is in the wrong fucking place. 

This clause further upsets me because it is animosity disguised as concern. People who make the compliance argument are seldom concerned with the well being of blacks. They are often more interested in attempting to justify and excuse the murderer's behavior so we as a nation don’t have to deal with the dissonance between our implied acknowledgement that black lives matter (because black lives do fit into all lives, right?) and our disgusting treatment of black people that suggests we don’t really believe that.

The compliance argument is just an extension of white America looking the other way while black people are victimized, devalued, and killed.

P.S. This post was in part inspired by the accusation made in some media outlets that Sandra Bland precipitated the circumstances of her rough arrest and death through her arrogance (read:failure to comply). I will say two things to this charge. One, the cop did behave legally. During a traffic stop a cop can order you out of your car. The Supreme Court established this rule in *Pennsylvania v. Mimms*. Legal, however, doesn’t mean fair. As I’ve said before, laws are made by those in power, and as result, tend to cater toward the powerful. Moreover, any person who watched the video astutely knows the officer instigated the circumstances under which Sandra Bland became hostile. He repeatedly asked her why she was mad and demanded she put out her cigarette even though she was at the time of his request free to leave. In that regard the blame falls on him for creating a hostile environment. I wonder if compliance arguers would hold the police should try a little harder to avoid hostile situations, given they are human and armed and all. I don’t know whether she actually hanged herself. But I do know her presence in that jail cell was already an injustice.




