Title: Stopping Trump
Category: Politics
Date: 2016/05/05

I just saw Hillary Clinton's new Trump attack ad. You can find it here: http://m.motherjones.com/politics/2016/05/hillary-clinton-wont-let-republicans-forget-never-trump

In standard Hillary Clinton fashion, her ad completely misses what Americans will actually respond to and instead just follows the standard playbook for an attack ad. I worry, if this trend continues, all of Hillary Clinton's ads will take this or a similar form. The problem with this approach, which, honestly, I'm shocked her team doesn't realize, is that it will be completely and utterly ineffective. Trump supporters don't care that he says offensive things, and for some of them his refusal to be "PC" is an appealing feature. They don't care that he has disrespected women on multiple occasions. In our liberal self-righteousness, we have assumed everyone believes as we do, and thus we believe that getting people to abandon Trump is a matter of showing them that he believes the stuff we think is bad. But Trump supporters don't think as we do, and basing a strategy on that premise is hopelessly foolish.

Instead, Hillary Clinton, in her attack ads, needs to focus on showing that Donald Trump is impotent. That his bravado, his confidence and tough talk, are all mere illusions to compensate for the fact that he doesn't know anything about policy, something he proves daily. Trump supporters support Trump because they believe he can actually make their lives better. They believe he is the candidate best suited to handle issues of terrorism, national security, the economy, and our ballooning national debt (according to the Washington post). A successful attack ad must be based on disproving that premise; it needs to show that Trump cannot make their lives better, and in fact he may make things much worse for them.

But the source from which that criticism is launched is also important. Perhaps it is the most important thing. The Hillary Clinton ad shows a bunch of familiar "establishment" faces saying Trump is a bad guy. A lot of Trump supporters are highly skeptical of the establishment and, as a result, the content of the message is immediately defeated by it coming from an untrustworthy source in the eyes of most Americans. A successful Trump attack ad needs to show everyday people coming from the demographics Trump relies on (primarily, though not exclusively, white, middle-aged, blue-collar working men, without college degrees). There are very few Trump supporters that will be moved by the words of Mitt Romney (featured multiple times in the ad). If Mitt's words were effective, they would have been effective when he said them...they were not. This holds true for Marco Rubio, Ted Cruz, many of the other people featured in the ad.

Many people reading myay sympathize with my worries but may allay their concerns by positing that this is just the first of many ads to come and there is no way to know how the rest of those ads will look. I think that is a very naive position to take. We have been expecting this Trump thing to sputter out or someone to expose him for far too long. Hillary Clinton and her campaign are particularly tone deaf when it comes to appealing to Americans, evident by her repeated shameless pandering attempts directed at minority community (Just like your abuela...really, Hillary?). It's why she is so unpopular (her unfavorability is at 54% as of the end of April according to the HuffingtonPost. Her formalistic approach to politics stinks of insincerity. I can see no reaosn why her or her campaign might become suddenly attuned to the American frequency. Moreover, releasing an ad as destined to be a flop as this first one, shows that her campiagn has not learned from the failed attempts of other attempting to derail Trump. Actually, this ad relies directly on those failed attempts. Given these circumstances I can see no reason why her campaign will suddenly realize the need to take a different course.

Many may also wonder how my proposed strategy will get people to vote for Hillary. To that I say, I don't know. This strategy is not aimed at getting people to vote for Hillary Clinton. The point of this strategy is to dissaude people from voting for Trump. According to a recently released Rasmussen Poll, when voters have the option to stay home, Trump is projected to beat Clinton by 2 points. It's early, and it's just one poll, but given the gravity of the harm threatened by a Trump presidency, that is one poll too many.

While I am not especially enthusiastic about a Hillary Clinton presidency, I am fearful of what Donald Trump's policy proposals will do to the moral integrity of our country and also the way his policies threaten the economy, which, thanks to President Obama, is headed in the right direction. But alas, because Hillary is almost certainly going to be the Democratic nominee I am out of choices.

P.S. For an expanded version of the ideas contained in this post please read my first ever blog post: "A Letter to Liberals". In that post I explained exactly why sentimental pandering will be ineffective in Social Justice Advocacy. But, having watched this campaign unfold, I now believe the ideas expanded on in that post are directly applicable to stopping Trump.
