Title: Can We Talk About It?
Category: Social Justice
Date: 2015/06/18

Conservative contributors to social justice discourse have been making two claims lately that I think require immediate attention. 

One: there is the argument that being oppressed has become in vogue. Dialogue and critical thought in the area of marginalization has shifted from attempting to explain contemporary mechanisms of oppression to finding ways to produce victims and perpetrators. This hypothesis is best demonstrated in think-pieces that wonder whether we have expanded the definitions of sexual assault too far or that inquire as to whether race is identified as a factor too frequently. Though the most extreme versions of this concern amount to little more than childish skepticism, a well reasoned version of this thinking does raise an important question: How do we know when our quest to identify oppression in all its forms has become a witch hunt. 

In past posts, I’ve committed myself to some positions that do make it necessary to examine the aforementioned argument closely. First, I don’t think oppression is subjective, so if the prevailing dialogue is calling more things oppression than fit the bill, that is a bad thing. As I explained in that post, it provides a strawman that delegitimizes other substantial social ameliorative efforts and it waste scarce resources (manpower, platforms, and money) fighting a problem that does not exist. It is in the interest of every social justice advocate to be sure they are fighting more than an imagined battle.

Identifying what battles are legitimate, however, is an augean task. The best I can offer here is to suggest a maxim for advocacy: leave no stone unturned in attempts to expose bigotry in every form it takes, but also work using falsifiable, predictive hypotheses. And, when those hypotheses are falsified, or when their predictions do not come to fruition, abandon those hypotheses. Claims like racism is everywhere, while effective rallying cries, do very little to aid the actual dismantling of racism. A much better theory is: if a social institution predictably disadvantages black people, then that institution likely functions in a racist way. This formulation allows us to look at the results and also enables us to entertain other possible explanations. There is no shortage of racism, sexism, homophobia, or any other forms of systemic oppression. We needn’t go out of our way to find more; we need to be vigilant not paranoid.

It may seem here that I’m siding with conservatives. To an extent I am. I am no fan of dogma in any area, and allowing ourselves to be so blinded by our passions for equitable outcomes that we begin to ask for a fixed society instead of a fair one does no one any good. Yes, we want to rid our society of all unfair, arbitrary obstacles and oppressive mechanism, but doing that necessarily involves being rational and more importantly, being fair ourselves.

Second, there is also the argument that notions like “tolerance for everything but intolerance,” while nobly motivated, ultimately restrict speech in the social justice debates, as anything that does not partake in the production and substantiation of victims is seen as intolerance. The concern is that liberal dialogue leaves no room for disagreement. The idea is that people will self-censor, removing their voice and also their hearts from the discussion. People with this concern often suggest that if people were less quick to pull the trigger on calling people racist, sexist, and the like, conversation would ultimately improve.

This argument, unlike the first, is facially attractive but theoretically misguided. We all want to have the most productive conversations we can, but I’m not sure liberating people to be as bigoted as they want is the best way to do that. We already know what happens when you allow people to freely express their ideas in areas surrounding race and sex...they say things that are really racist and sexist. How do I know this? Well, prior to this most recent epoch of “self-censoring” people spoke freely for centuries and I doubt anyone’s unaware of what they said. Think about your family functions where people believe they are in a comfortable space. Isn’t that usually when your uncle or grandma says that super intolerant thing that you can’t believe people still think?

The liberal “policing of speech” does seem to have the primary consequence of forcing people to think their arguments through more thoroughly, ideally leading to the presentation of their ideas in a palatable form. I think it is dishonest to pretend that we are losing some super profound thoughts. In conservative fringe speech everything is voiced irrespective of what anyone thinks and a lot of it is racist and sexist and most commentators are not discovering new ground. Much of what goes on in social justice dialogue is recycling arguments, endlessly. This happens on all sides. Suggesting that people be careful with how they frame their arguments is not stopping that, but it does act to take away some of the bite of arguments that have historically been little more than vitriolic hate speech and victim-blaming.

P.S. Simply put, if you can’t say it without being sexist or racist or homophobic, don’t say it. Your bigoted statement is not what’s going to turn the tide. Pretending that you’re (1) so interested in the well being of groups that you only ever talk about to deny their plight that (2) any suggestion that you curtail your speech would harm those groups is at best a farce but is at worse a slap in the face. 

