Title: The Great America Hypothesis
Category: Political Philosophy
Date: 2016/02/11

Marco Rubio, as a part of a historic meltdown in last week’s Republican Presidential Debate, continually mentioned that Barack Obama was trying to deliberately change America. Rubio, though spouting short repetitive speeches with the fervor of a pull-string doll, did manage, with the aforementioned remarks, to conjure a sentiment that inspires many people to oppose progressive agendas. Stated simply, the position goes something like this: America is the kind of thing that requires specific circumstances to persist or that has certain principles underlying it that demand fidelity, perhaps for fear that failure to provide those circumstances or be faithful to those principles will cause this great thing, America, to come crashing down.

This position has some appeal because it posits, both, that America is great, and moreover, that America’s greatness is dependent on known principles or circumstantial truths that we are able to protect or conjure. 

Seems, a bit naive, though.

Independent of what America is (an inquiry to be discussed below), one who believes in a sentiment like the one above is going to have to provide an especially compelling narrative for what makes America the kind of thing that can be immune to social and economic realities; the kind of thing that when done correctly will always succeed. This follows from the fact that people who believe in the “Great America Hypothesis” often talk of changing America as an inherently bad thing. If change is a bad thing, it must be because America always works when done correctly. So, if America always works, despite changing circumstances, then I think it is reasonable to ask how that process of perpetual success functions. One would also need to explain how, especially in a globalizing world, and with an increasingly diverse population, America would manage to, through increased abstraction, avoid problems that would have been impossible to imagine at the time the principles were invented, discovered, or promulgated.

But, though that criticism may appear obvious to some, it is actually not that effective at showing the problems with the “Great America Hypothesis,” at least not without first delineating what the term America means, as used by this ideas proponents.

The most natural way of thinking of the concept of America might be to understand it in terms of it’s physical barriers or population. Both these things, since the countries genesis, have changed considerably. But, if we consider that America could be viewed as not the people, but their will coalesced in a democratic majority, then America, the concept, at least begins to take form. Unfortunately, it isn’t possible that this is what Rubio, Trump, and many other “Great America Hypothesis” subscribers mean. After all, if the people were America, then when the people voted for a progressive Agenda, it would be odd to think of said action as being deleterious to America, and would certainly be odd to speak in a way that positioned an elected official carrying out that will, say a Barack Obama, as an opponent or betrayer of America.

The next, more abstract, candidate for what America means in the context of the GAH is that America is an agreement between people to do things like follow the law, work hard, and leave others alone in their affairs. By this account, progressive agendas threaten the fabric of America by enabling the federal government to intrude deeper into our lives. Progressive agendas, a GAH subscriber might say, also undermine the American work ethic, as greater welfare leads to increased dependence. If people aren’t working hard or aren’t left to their own devices in as much of their private lives as possible, America, in some significant way, is not working. The agreement is betrayed. I wonder, though, who made the agreement? Certainly not me. And I’d guess not you. Was it the founders agreeing amongst themselves? Why should you or I be bound by that? What do I owe them? Especially as a black person. Their definition of people didn’t even include me. The agreement idea, for all it’s merits, doesn’t really make sense because no such agreement actually took place, at least not one that could have been made at America’s inception and would further still have binding force today.

This is where GAHers posit principle. It isn’t, the argument goes, necessarily about the founders, or even about the American people at any given time. America, it is said, is an idea to strive toward more than a manifest thing to be examined. By this logic progressive agendas represent a deviation from America’s course (perhaps God given but possibly not) that if followed faithfully, promises to provide every generation of Americans with a better life than their parents had. GAHers suggest further that by focusing too narrowly on present satisfaction in the form of welfare and other progressive platforms, progressives undermine those principles, which may produce a short-term benefit, but almost certainly promises to rob Americans some x number of generations away of their chance at enhanced prosperity.

I think this is the argument most GAHers believe and I think reasonably so. History, American history especially, is filled with stories of cultures trading long term benefit for short term gain, ultimately sowing the seeds of their demise. But, I ask GAHers, is it possible that America has already lost it’s way? More importantly, is it possible that the principles that will guide America to generation after generation of renewed success have yet to be fully embraced, and thus a progressive agenda, if feasible and, for a lack of a better term, good, would help and not hinder America’s course to/of greatness.

Consider this, at the time America espoused the importance of equality, slavery existed and women couldn’t vote. Austerity and laisseiz faire policies caused The Great Depression, as too much of America’s wealth was amassed in too few hands. Staying the course was not an option. Limited Government was not the solution. Doubling down on free markets would not have helped. It was in these instances the federal government, armed with a progressive agenda, saved America, temporarily, from moral bankruptcy and economic turmoil. Is it not worth considering that we may be approaching such an episode in American history again? I mean to say, even if GAHers are right, don’t the pillars of any great society need to be replaced or reconstructed (1865-1877, 1933-1945, 1963-1969, ?2016?-?). It’s not unreasonable that even the most enthusiatic servants of “American principles” may occasionally err and that America, as a result may be worse off for the ideaological purity of those who claim to be serving it. Sometimes, America’s greatness is available to some, in those times, don’t we need some progress? Might bringing that progress to fruition involve an Agenda? Can we fairly characterize that agenda as progressive? 

Also, who says America is great? Sure, America is  better place to live than many other countries...but great? I don’t know. I think many segments of the population would argue that America hasn’t been great for a while...much longer than 8 years. Some others might even contend that America was never great. This country, like any other country has suffered political strife, economic hardship, and social revolutions. We landed a man on the moon, but we also had Japanese internment camps. We won two World Wars, but we also launched a war on drugs that has produced only losers from every perspective. Perhaps America is not all that exceptional. Maybe, America, like other countries, changes with time, some good and some bad. If that is true, then arguing against a platform simply because it produces changes would be rather silly, no?

But most importantly, change can be a good thing. Many progressive agendas take aim at discrimination of all kinds and also look to increase the baseline well being of the citizenry. Perhaps that is not the American way, and our Constitution’s lack of positive rights suggests that is so. But in that case, if these things are good, let’s not reject them because they are new or foreign. Much like the many generations of immigrants that have enhanced this countries greatness, so too have ideas that were foreign to the people who would ultimately benefit from them (Social Security and Medicare are great examples). America is not a great experiment in Nation-building anymore. It’s a country with suffering citizens, racial divisions, sexist and racist institutions, and a seriously deficient baseline. But it doesn’t have to be this way. America, despite what a GAHer will tell you, doesn’t have to be any particular way. America has seen success and failure in many different forms. We, the people, get to decide.

P.S. This is not  a policy post. This is simply a philosophical inquiry into the nature of an idea I find illogical and counter-productive. Holding on to idealized versions of the past will not solve today’s problem. Don’t let anyone tell you your suffering is inherent in America working!  
