Title: Too Smart To Be Racist
Category: Race
Date: 2016/02/18

I write today from a place of frustration. In part because racism, what it is and how it works一how it has always worked一continues to escape the comprehension of the masses; in part because instances of this social failure to comprehend routinely manifest themselves in bigoted sentiments and ignorant justifications of those sentiments. Recent events have provided an excellent opportunity to directly observe some of the most pernicious forms of racism’s apologism.

But first some context.

While I was at Lafayette College, I took a walk one morning with a visiting Philosophy professor, Nick Riggle. We were discussing Aristotle and the impressive nature of his ideas given the time. I chimed in that his normative judgments on race and sex and the poor weren’t that great. Professor Riggle responded that if he were around now, he’d be smart enough to see beyond racism and his other mental impairments. I responded that Aristotle thought women had less teeth than men even though the evidence to the contrary was all around him.

Justice Scalia’s unexpected death predictably lead to a rush of brief bios. Many critics remarked about how the plethora of laudatory articles about Scalia all minimized the amount of racism and homophobia that characterized many of his opinions in those areas. What few mentioned, however, is how much credit Scalia gets for being such a committed formalist and a great legal thinker, and how these qualities are used to characterize him as outside of racism’s grasp. As if his intellect makes him immune to the political lens that has colored all of American politics. It does not.

It could not. The reason? Racism has nothing to do with one’s reasoning abilities. Racism is an idiosyncrasy. It’s a way of perceiving the world, ingrained so deeply that it becomes preferred. A preference so strong it scares us to think we have it because we know we like it. 

But the fact remains, no one is too smart to be racist. Racism is irrational. It necessarily is grounded in sentiment and habit; our sub and unconscious tendencies that shape our world and how we move in it. No number of brainfolds, academic degrees, or positions of distinguishment, Columbia Law Professorship or otherwise, can ever by itself make someone immune to this social disease.

The founding fathers were brilliant men. And yet each one of them had slaves or looked the other way. Each of them were unmoved by the oppression of women, or at least not moved enough to ensure that they’d be included in the supposed democracy. But to deny these men were smart would be absurd.

Some are quick to respond here by pointing out that these men, though smart, lived during a time where these opinions were so unchallenged that they would have never turned their reasoning abilities to it. Though attractive, this is just a patently untrue statement. Abolitionist sentiments were already fully developed. Men like Lafayette saw slavery as obviously unjust, and de Tocqueville observed that the differences in present in America between the races were likely the consequence of circumstance. Moreover, Thomas Jefferson and other great thinkers of the age did turn their intellectual gaze on the concept of race. Jefferson concluded “Comparing them by their faculties of memory, reason, and imagination, it appears to me, that in memory they are equal to the whites; in reason much inferior, as I think one [black] could scarcely be found capable of tracing and comprehending the investigations of Euclid; and that in imagination they are dull, tasteless, and anomalous (Note On The State Of Virginia, 1781).”

Most importantly, I agree. That’s how idiosyncrasies work. They are not subject to our reasoning abilities but instead are built from our conditioning and experience. Intellect withers in comparison. But it is with that in mind that I ask we return to the notion that smart men of our age, through their intelligence, have move beyond racism. Surely this proposition should now at least arouse your suspicion.

But, unless I say more, this seems more like a complaint than a criticism. But this is a really problematic blindspot. Misunderstanding how racism works is part of reproducing racism and other sentiments that inhibit factions of the human race directly and the entire species indirectly. 

Let me explain.

We give a lot of respect to those we deem smart. More pertinently, we give a lot of deference to their ideas. We see their thoughts and the concepts they produce as authoritative, often because we have people we think are smart in the most prominent positions of our governmental, economic, and social hierarchies. If we simultaneously fail to recognize that racism isn’t defeated by intellectual talent, we allow racism to freely move throughout our society, disguised as a judge, or a philosopher, or a professor, or a news anchor.

Racism persists because we accept it. If we all ever decided that we’d rather not have a segregated society, the fractions it causes, the unjust distribution of resources resulting from those fractions, the poverty created by that distribution, the social evils precipitated by that poverty, the overreaction to those social evils and subsequent further oppression...if we all decide those things are of a kind we’d be better off without, then we’d be without them. Since that day doesn’t especially forthcoming, we can at least begin to construct a receptive academic and social infrastructure for that day. Part of that construction necessarily involves finally acknowledging a point of emphasis I’ve consistently stressed. As I explained in *Bigots Can Be Nice People*, “bigotry is the conscious, latent, or tacit belief that a person's race, sex, sexual orientation, gender, etc. is a marker of deficiencies in character, ability, or intelligence that lead to the person being of less intrinsic value and, perhaps dangerous, untrustworthy, expendable, or unfitting of fair treatment and full dignity.” It’s not about reasoning ability; it’s about the assumptions, say that foodstamp recipients are likely lazy or spending their money on drugs and alcohol, a suggestion not so subtly dropped by a professor of mine today, that we make before we ever start reasoning; the impulses we refer back to after our calculations are done. Consequently, no person of any qualification is inherently immune to racism or any other such impediment.

P.S. The good news is we can get by it by acknowledging our shortcomings and actively acting against them. Or, I guess, we can keep screaming about how we’re “not racist” because we’re smart, or liberal, or “feel like we’re not.” That strategy has produced some skewed social outcomes but it is comfortable and thus preferable, right?
