Title: Unplanned Parenthood
Category: Feminism
Date: 2015/08/13

Planned Parenthood is under attack. Conservatives, fueled by a false video that purports to show the organization selling fetal tissue, have demanded Planned Parenthood be defunded and discontinued. Any astute observers knows the video is only cursorily related to the conservative motivations to take down Planned Parenthood. In truth, this is just the latest attempt to undermine women’s constitutionally protected right to choose to terminate pregnancies established in *Roe v. Wade* and reaffirmed in *Pennsylvania v. Casey*.

For many conservatives, Planned Parenthood is little more than an abortion agency. But that’s a really naive and limited appraisal of what Planned Parenthood does. For starters, according to their website, abortive services only account for about 3% of Planned Parenthood activities. Their most common service offered is actually STI testing and treatment (41%), followed by information and materials for contraception (34%), followed by other women’s health services and initiatives (11%), followed by cancer screening and prevention (10%). So, even if we were to accept the conservative suggestion that abortions are bad, Planned Parenthood is still an indispensable organization.

Even more confusing is the myriad of contradictions surrounding conservative opposition to Planned Parenthood. If the true goal is to have less abortions in our society, something I think is an admirable goal, one might think we should be doubling down on sexual education and contraception. But, conservative tend to oppose both these methods because they fear children exposed to contraception and sex education will be more likely to engage in sex. But, that’s just not true. 

A 2008 Bixby Center study found no difference in sexual behavior between students who had condoms programs at their schools and students who didn’t with one exception: the students with access to condoms used condoms at a much higher rate. The same has been noted for sex education. In fact, the only unreliable method of increasing safe sex and thus decreasing unplanned pregnancies, seems to be abstinence pledges. A Columbia University study found that 88% of pledge takers initiate sex before marriage, and when they do have sex their rate of condom use is extremely low. Even lower is their likelihood of seeking STI testing. That people are still advocating for this approach is actually quite alarming. People are going to have sex. The least we can do is ensure that their choice to do so is informed and safe.

Furthermore, even if we only focus on the 3% of Planned Parenthood activity that conservatives seem to care about, Planned Parenthood is still vital to our nation’s success. Abortions, are most commonly utilized by the young and the poor, i.e. individuals who do not have the resources to care for children. Since, according to the CDC 1973 over 53 million legal abortions were carried out in the US. That’s a minimum of 53 million more people in this country, most of whom would be born to young, poor, or young and poor parents. Some would have gone on to lead prosperous successful lives, surely. But some would not have. Conservatives very often champion the importance of proper parenting. Why then do they insist on forcing children on people who, through their actions, are clearly saying, “hey we’re not ready to be parents”?

To the most devout opponents of Planned Parenthood, all I’ve said is irrelevant. Human life is sacred, they say, and as a result Planned Parenthood must go. It’s very common that people who are anti-choice will accuse pro-choicers of not fully appreciating human life. I contend, however, that anyone who thinks a fetus is synonymous with a human life is indeed mistaking. In the first trimester, when roughly 92% of abortions happen, the clump of cells that make an embryo are completely unaware of their surroundings and that they exist. There isn’t even the beginnings of a brain or spinal cord until six weeks in Human life, at least my human life and the human life of those I know, is actually all about being aware you exist and coming to terms with that. So yes, the embryos are human, and they are alive, but they are not experiencing human lives. This might explain why most legal talk about embryos refers to them as potential life.

And, concern for potential life should never dominate a woman’s right to decide how her body will be used. Bodily autonomy is a sacred notion in our tradition. Older than both free speech and racism. To ask half of the population of this country to sacrifice that is unconscionable. And, in the same spirit, there is no dignity in attempting to defund one of our nation's leading agencies of women's health and wellness.

P.S. Unplanned Parenthood can be a great thing. But Planned Parenthood is a godsend. 



