Title: White Entertainment Television
Category: Social Justice
Date: 2015/10/22

A lot of really smart people have explained why reverse racism is a silly concept. Yet some people still argue that Black Entertainment Television, affirmative action, ethnic celebratory parades, and mantras like Black Lives Matter are assaults on white people just because white people, they say, don’t have equivalent institutions.

I’ll start by agreeing. White people do not have equivalent institutions; they have much better institutions. White people don’t need a White Entertainment Television because they have Television. White people don’t need affirmative action because they dominate almost every field (and their dominance is duplicated every generation because people generally empower people that are similar to them, and as a nation we have yet to truly unite behind an American identity; probably because we don’t know each other and *de facto* segregation ensures that will remain true). White people certainly don’t need white specific celebratory parades (even though they do actually have them) because any parade not celebrating an ethnic minority or queer folk is a white celebration parade (unless you actually think black people, hispanics, and and Native Americans feel included when there are parades for the murderous pilgrims on Thanksgiving, or when we celebrate independence from Britain as if every person in America was awarded freedom at that time).

But of course, some of you are still unconvinced. To really demonstrate my point, I ask you to participate in a thought experiment. Let’s start by assuming that all these minority-centered institutions are actually racist (or reverse racist) and the only way to make our society fair and equitable is to either eliminate the institutions or give white people similar ones. In this new world of White Entertainment Television, white student associations, white affirmative action, white parades, white history month, and mantras like White Lives Matter (Or All Lives Matter because I don’t think there’s a difference between the two), I think it would be important to ask one question: what has changed?

If we had White Entertainment Television, how would that programing differ from the programing one generally finds on TV? Where BET puts black actors on TV and shows them dealing with things unique to the black experience, WET would likely just have white people on TV dealing with with white people stuff. You know what TV networks currently put white people on TV and discuss white people experiences? All of them.

If we had white student associations, what would they discuss? Where minority and queer student associations provide spaces for ethnic and queer individuals to feel surrounded by people who identify similarly, a white student group would be kind of redundant, no? And, we also know that when majority groups get together in celebration of their majority status they, for some weird reason, are usually motivated to do harm to other groups (e.g. KKK, WestBoro Baptist Church, etc.). Also, do straight people really need a safe space to be straight?

If we had white history month, what would we study? Probably Europe. Oh, wait. Uh, I guess we could study important white people. Wait again. That’s what we study. All the time. In every discipline.

If we had white affirmative action, however, that would make a difference. That would certainly increase the representation of white people in every field. I guess here I ask, do you want our society to be more white (that would make you at least a little racist, right)? Do you really feel like white people are underrepresented?

What would happen if we chanted White Lives Matter? Probably nothing. The whole point of Black Lives Matter is bringing attention to the fact that black people face disparate treatment from our legal system and our society at large. White people do not (though, I see some utility in a poor people’s lives matter mantra, as there is significant evidence that poor people of any race really do not get fair treatment in the legal system. But, of course, black poor people get it much worse than white poor people).

So, what has changed? Nothing. I guess the solution must be, then, to eliminate the minority-centered institutions. Indeed, this would lead to change. Black issues would go undiscussed, or would only be discussed in the margins. Black actors would continue to be marginalized into stereotyped roles. Queer folk would be deprived of safe spaces. Women’s issues would be ignored.

What some fail to realize is that there are issues they never think about that greatly impact the lives of others. And, even if straight white men did care, they are very often missing the requisite experience to know what those problems are and how they might be solved. Oppression may not be subjective (see Oppression Is Not Subjective) but it certainly does have subjects. Moreover, those subjects, if they are to defeat oppression, must be allowed to organize, agitate, and support one another. Why would anyone oppose that?

P.S. Even if one accepts these arguments, there still might be the concern that exclusionary activities like those mentioned above subvert integrative efforts. I’ll give that argument serious attention when I’m made aware of serious integrative efforts. There may also be the concern that these minority-centered institutions partake in the same exclusion of which they complain. I think this accusation is manifestly untrue. Straight white men are always welcomed, provided they can understand the difference between appreciation and appropriation, and the difference between being an ally and being a savior. I’ll write on those distinctions next week.
