Title: What Are White Men Owed?
Date: 2015/2/19
Category: Political Philosophy

In mainstream discussion, there appears to be a vacancy on this topic. But I can’t seem to shake the question. When I promulgated my political motivations I insisted that I take “all of humanity seriously: ALL OF HUMANITY.” Perhaps this is why throughout my advocacy for racial equity, equality between the sexes, gay rights, and my perpetual campaign against bigotry, there is always present a strong consideration that I think is sometimes absent from a lot of commentary on these issues: what are white men owed?

The question may seem odd. Owed? White Men? Don’t they already have enough? Isn’t society predicated around their advancement, comfort, and actualization? Would they be owed anything else? How could they be owed anything else?

Well, let me try to explain what I mean.

At the core of my concern is the idea that human dignity is not a commodity but an, ideally, unimpeachable good that must be cherished at all times (I, here, commit my next post to explaining my exact views of human dignity) and should never be sacrificed in the name of some supposed utility. If that is so, then a concentrated effort to expose and rectify historical legacies of marginalization and oppression and the accompanying efforts to dismantle contemporary institutional mechanisms of oppression mustn’t be approached dogmatically and with the eventual good of the previously abused (e.g. minorities, women, gays), as the only concern of the advocate; even if the eventual good of the historically abused population is the epicenter of the advocacy.

Said much more simply: one injustice should not replace another.

But, that invites the very important questions: what counts as an injustice against the white man? Some historical retributivist might hold that the historical white man has trampled the rights of so many groups that he has relinquished his claim for moral consideration and thus no action aimed at undoing his workings should be fettered by concerns for him or his ancestor’s welfare.

While I generally subscribed to retributivism - people should be punished according to the level of agency they demonstrated and the crime they committed, and no more - I think this line of reasoning is deeply mistaken. Though it is often said as an excuse by some white people to continue to ignore the obvious evidence of institutional racism, the champions of “I was never a slave-owner” do have a point: they were not the perpetrators of historical injustices, and many (in fact I dare say most) white people are not complicit in the continued oppression of other segments of society, even if their unintentional exploitation of socially ingrained privileges has an oppressive consequence.

But, I obviously support a wide-range of actions that would necessarily diminish the situation of white male Americans. I, however, only support these kinds of actions (e.g. wealth redistribution) so far as they will effectively and systematically improve the plights of previously marginalized and disempowered groups. If it turns out wealth distribution will not help (very unlikely but stay with me), I think a true commitment to respecting human dignity for all would mandate not pursuing that avenue.

This hints at the first thing I think white men are owed: efforts to cure unfortunate social problems should only diminish the standing of white men as is necessary and effective. Affirmative action, for example, should be utilized if it does indeed help identify black candidates that are equally able and sometimes more able but don’t perform as well on culturally biased test. But if the tests are actually fair, or if affirmative action doesn’t work in a way that promotes prepared but misidentified candidates, then affirmative action should be abandoned.

I think a more palatable formulation of this idea is that we should only utilize policies that work, and should avoid excessively undermining white guys attempts to live decent, fulfilling lives, encroaching when necessary but being careful and considerate when doing so.

Second, I think white men are owed the opportunity to do their part. Vilifying all white men, labeling them all as the oppressor is not only unfair, it is simply untrue. Yes, white privilege is real. But, by no means are all white people animus-filled bigots. Even some of opponents of social justice initiatives only are opponents because they’ve yet to come in contact with adequate explanations of the social phenomena that oppress and marginalize, and have thus concluded oppression only exists in the complaints of the oppressed.

In keeping with that idea, white men are owed good explanations. While I don’t think white men need to comply with the forces of progress for them to move forward, they should at least have access to the arguments and evidence that justify those initiatives. There is no need for white people to get on board, *per se*, but there is certainly a need to let them know why and how the ship moves. If they choose to remain ignorant, so be it.

Lastly, I think white men are owed a fucking reality check. How some can pretend that we live in true meritocracy that just so happened to produce institutions dominated by white men at every turn, is puzzling. The long history of exploitation is well documented. The statistics are there. Check incarceration rates. Look at the distribution of wealth. Look at the composition of the executive boards of the most powerful corporations. Look at rates at which certain groups face poverty. You can’t actually truly believe that this all just happened. There are systems at work. You owe it to all the rest of society to at least take a look.

P.S. I know this is a weird post. But I think a necessary post. Maybe it’s not the right time for these considerations. In a time when many people are still unwilling to acknowledge the institutionally caused plights of some groups in society, and completely adverse to taking action to cure them, the last thing I want to do is provide further justification and excuses for continued ignorance. Maybe the day will come when progress is roaring forward that we need to stop and ponder whether we are being fair in our pursuit of fairness. I will acknowledge that we are not currently there. We have gone nowhere near far enough. We have not even begun real dialogue on what I think are the real solutions. I don’t know. But they are my thoughts, and that’s all I’ve promised.
