Title: Who Can Be Racist?
Date: 2017/04/27
Category: Race

Most, but unfortunately not all, believe racism is a terrible thing our society would be better without. But when asked what racism is or, more pertinent here, who can be racist, people give a startling range of responses. The dissonance between the definitions of racism kills any hope of conversation; and where there is no communication there is equally as much opportunity for social change. If we are going to identify racism and root it out of our society, we’d be best served agreeing about what it is.

Some people believe racism is simply interpersonal prejudice based on race. To subscribers of this definition, it doesn’t matter who is the subject of the racism nor does it matter who is being racist, the important thing to consider is whether the animosity or mistreatment a person undergoes is a product of their race and a belief that the race of the subject of the racism is inferior or somehow deserving of the harm they are being made to undergo. Though taking many words to fully capture, that conception of racism is simple. One might even go as far as to say it is intuitive. Perhaps this is why it is the overwhelming accepted definition of racism. But it would be an *ad populum* fallacy to suggest that just because that conception of racism was widely held it was also the correct way to think about it.

The primary challenger to the above stated hypothesis about racism is more complex, but also more nuanced. This way of describing racism doesn’t necessarily take a position on the correctness of the previous definition of racism. It instead denies the importance of the previous definition. The racism that matters, goes the argument, is the racism that stems from an empowered class and is directed at an oppressed class. In the American context—the one I’m most familiar with—that is racism from white people directed at people of color, historically, the worst of it directed at black people. This understanding of racism asks us to look at how power and influence are spread across institutions and then consider the distribution of resources in our society accordingly. The hypothesis is further complicated by the well-documented history of discrimination and race-based violence for which the United States is World famous, that sadly continues into the present day.

A brief scan of our society reveals, as I’ve stated many times throughout this blog, that white people, specifically, white men, hold a disproportionate amount of the resources, power, and influence in our society. Given this fact, this camp continues that this overwhelming influence ultimately acts as an immunization from racism. Since they control so much, goes the argument, they can’t be the **victims** of racism even if prejudice is sometimes directed at them. Black people, on the other hand, lacking this influence and the often-accompanying resources are significantly more vulnerable to racism and, moreover, are the meaningful victims of race-based prejudice more often.

The second camp has a very compelling narrative, one that chills the bones and invites much reflection. But they also have a bad theoretical framework. Everything they say is true, racism directed at blacks has a robust history and, because of the current configuration of our social institutions, tends to have excessively more devastating consequences. But the framework they use to describe racism confuses consequences with principle.

In principle, racism is race-based prejudice. No more, no less. White people can be victims. Black people can be victims. White people can be racist. Black people can be racist. That said, viewed at the level of structures and institutions, race based prejudice is overwhelmingly amplified with respect to the black experience. White people seldom must worry about negative stereotypes affecting job prospects. White people seldom must question whether the state is using violence arbitrarily to deal with them. Just look at the change in rhetoric surrounding the drug war now that white people are more likely to suffer the consequence of addiction and the associated increase in criminality, property destruction, and policing. When our society acts, it unfortunately acts in racist manner far too often. But that doesn’t mean white people don’t face racism and it doesn’t mean that black people can’t be racist. I know black people who are racist. Hell, I don’t know many people who aren’t. There is very little to be gained by relying on unreasonable definitions. The facts are on the side of justice…let’s argue them. When we use definitions that appear as special pleading it obscures a powerful message…our society is broken. Racism directed at blacks is the culprit. But racism directed at whites isn’t unimportant. Racism or any prejudice is a bad thing. We need to rid our society of it in all its forms.

Justice for all is an uncomfortable stance to fully subscribe to. But it is the only stance from which you can cast any meaningful criticism of our society that can’t be dismissed as you just wanting your team to win. Like it or not, you need to be convincing to people who disagree with you, and telling them they don’t have problems or defining away their grievances is not the way. People are dying.

P.S. Many will not make it to the end of this post. They will get to the point where they find disagreement and they will stop reading. And just like that the problems of our society will be perpetuated into the future.
 

